RATIONALISATION OF CONTENT IN THE TEXTBOOKS
In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce content load
on students. The National Education Policy 2020, also emphasises reducing
the content load and providing opportunities for experiential learning with
creative mindset. In this background, the NCERT has undertaken the
exercise to rationalise the textbooks across all classes. Learning Outcomes
already developed by the NCERT across classes have been taken into
consideration in this exercise.
Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of the
following:
•

Overlapping with similar content included in other subject areas in the
same class

•

Similar content included in the lower or higher class in the same subject

•

Difficulty level

•

Content, which is easily accessible to students without much
interventions from teachers and can be learned by children through
self-learning or peer-learning

•

Content, which is irrelevant in the present context

This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying out the
changes given above.

iv

FOREWORD
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF) 2005, recommends that
children’s life at school must be linked to their life outside the school.
This principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learning
which continues to shape our system and causes a gap between the
school, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed on
the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. They
also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp
boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these measures
will take us significantly further in the direction of a child-centred system
of education outlined in the National Policy on Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals
and teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own
learning and to pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must
recognise that, given space, time and freedom, children generate new
knowledge by engaging with the information passed on to them by adults.
Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of examination is one
of the key reasons why other resources and sites of learning are ignored.
Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat
children as participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of
knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode
of functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour
in implementing the annual calendar so that the required number of
teaching days are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used for
teaching and evaluation will also determine how effective this textbook
proves for making children’s life at school a happy experience, rather
than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to
address the problem of curricular burden by restructuring and
reorienting knowledge at different stages with greater consideration for
child psychology and the time available for teaching. The textbook
attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority and space
to opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in small
groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.

The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCER T)
appreciates the hard work done by the textbook development committee
responsible for this book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory group
in Social Sciences, Professor Hari Vasudevan and the Chief Advisor for this book,
Professor Tapas Majumdar for guiding the work of this committee. Several teachers
contributed to the development of this textbook; we are grateful to their principals
for making this possible. We are indebted to the institutions and organisations
which have generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material and
personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of the National Monitoring
Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary and Higher Education,
Ministry of Human Resource Development under the Chairpersonship of Professor
Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and contribution.
As an organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement
in the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which
will enable us to undertake further revision and refinement.

New Delhi
20 December 2005

Director
National Council of Educational
Research and Training

TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR TEXTBOOKS IN SOCIAL SCIENCES
AT HIGHER SECONDARY LEVEL

Hari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, University of
Calcutta, Kolkata

CHIEF ADVISOR
Tapas Majumdar, Emeritus Professor, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New
Delhi

MEMBERS
Bharat C. Thakur, PGT, Government Pratibha Vikas Vidyalaya, Surajmal
Vihar, Delhi
Gopinath Perumula, Lecturer, Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai
Jaya Singh, Lecturer, DESS, NCERT, New Delhi
Nishit Ranjan Das, PGT, New Alipore Multipurpose School, Behala, Kolkata
Naushad Ali Azad, Professor, Department of Economics, Jamia Millia
Islamia, New Delhi
Neeraja Rashmi, Reader, DESS, NCERT, New Delhi
Rama Gopal, Professor, Department of Economics, Annamalai University,
Annamalai Nagar, Tamil Nadu
Pratima Kumari, Lecturer, DERPP, NCERT, New Delhi
Poonam Bakshi, Senior Lecturer, Department of Economics, Punjab
University, Chandigarh
R. Srinivasan, S.G. Lecturer, Department of Economics, Arignar Anna
Government Arts College, Villupuram, Tamil Nadu
Sabitha Patnaik, PGT, Demonstration School, Regional Institute of
Education, Sachivalaya Marg, Bhubaneswar
Sharmista Banerjee, Headmistress, Bidya Bharti Girls High School, Kolkata

MEMBER–COORDINATOR
M.V. Srinivasan, Lecturer, DESS, NCERT, New Delhi

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Many friends and colleagues have helped in preparing this textbook. The National
Council
of
Educational
Research
and
Training
acknowledges
M. Karpagam, Lecturer, Department of Economics, Meenakshi College, Chennai; J.
John, Director, Centre for Education and Communication, New Delhi; Pratyusa K.
Mandal, Reader, DESS, NCERT, New Delhi; Nandana Reddy, Director (Development),
Concern for Working Children, Bangalore; V. Selvam, Research Scholar, Centre for
Study of Regional Development and Satish Jain, Professor, Centre for Economic
Studies and Planning, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi; Pooja Kapoor,
Modern School, Barakhamba Road, New Delhi; Priya Vaidya, Sardar Patel Vidyalaya,
Lodhi Estate, New Delhi; and Nalini Padmanabhan, DTEA Senior Secondary School,
Janakpuri, New Delhi for providing their feedback and inputs.
The Council expresses its gratitude to Jan Breman and Parthiv Shah for using
photographs from their book, Working in the mill no more, published by Oxford
University Press, Delhi. Some stories were taken from the book, Everybody Loves a
Good Drought, authored by P. Sainath and published by Penguin Books, New Delhi.
A photo relating to farmers committing suicides has been used from The Hindu. A
few photographs and text materials on environmental issues have been used from
the State of India’s Environment 1 and 2 published by the Centre for Science and
Environment, New Delhi. The Council thanks the authors, copyright holders and
publishers of these reference materials. The Council also acknowledges the Press
Information Bureau, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, New Delhi; National
Rail Museum, New Delhi for allowing to use photographs available in their photo
library. Some photographs were given by S. Thirumal Murugan, Principal, Adhiyaman
Matriculation School, Uthangarai, Tamil Nadu; John Suresh Kumar, Synodical Board
of Social Service; Sindhu Menon of Labour File, New Delhi; R. C. Das of CIET, New
Delhi; Renuka of National Institute of Health and Family Welfare, New Delhi. The
Council acknowledges their contribution as well. Special thanks are due to Savita
Sinha, Professor and Head, Department of Education in Social Sciences and
Humanities for her support. The Council gratefully acknowledges the contributions
of Mamta and Arvind Sharma, DTP Operators; Neena Chandra, Copy Editor; Dillip
Kumar Agasti, Proof Reader; and Dinesh Kumar, Incharge Computer Station in shaping
this book. The efforts of the Publication Department, NCER T are also duly
acknowledged.
The Council also acknowledges the efforts of Neerja Rashmi, Professor, DESS,
NCERT; M.V. Srinivasan, DESS, NCERT; Jaya Singh, DESS, NCERT; Pratima Kumari,
Associate Professor, DESS, NCERT; Ashita Raveendran, Associate Professor, PMD,
NCERT; Sabita Patnaik, PGT Economics, DMS, RIE, Bhubaneshwar; Anita Raveendra
PGT Economics, DMS, RIE, Mysore, towards the rationalisation of content of the
textbook.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS FROM AHSEC
National Council of Educational Research and Training, New Delhi
has given copyright and has granted permission to Assam Higher
Secondary Education Council to print and publish this textbook for the
students of H.S. 2nd year, under the jurisdiction of Assam Higher
Secondary Education Council.
Assam Higher Secondary Education Council, Guwahati expresses
its deep gratitude and highly obliged to National Council of Educational
Research and Training.

Bamunimaidam
Guwahati-781021

Secretary
Assam Higher Secondary Education Council

HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
The main objective of this book, Indian Economic Development, is to
expose you to some of the key issues facing the Indian economy. In this
process, as young adults, you are expected to be sensitised about these
issues, appreciate and learn to critically assess the role of the government
in various economic spheres. The book also provides opportunities for
knowing what economic resources are and how these resources are
being utilised in different sectors. You are also exposed to numerical
information relating to various aspects of Indian economy and India’s
economic policies. You are expected to develop analytical skills, interpret
the economic events and visualise the economic future of India.
Nevertheless, conscious effort has been made not to burden with concepts
and data.
With regard to various economic issues and trends, this book
attempts to bring out alternative views on every issue so that you can
engage yourself in well-informed debates. On completion of the course,
Indian Economic Development, you are expected to acquire skills to
understand macroeconomic events which occur around you, and to
critically evaluate and interpret the relevant information provided by
the media.
This course comprises of many activities with each chapter. You need
to carry out those activities under the guidance of teachers. In fact, the
role of the teacher in enriching the understanding of the Indian economy
is greater in this course. The activities include classroom discussions,
collecting information from government documents such
as Economic Survey, archival materials, from newspapers,
television, internet and other sources. Learners should also
be encouraged to read the original works of scholars on
various topics.
For all this to happen, the teachers have to initiate the
process by taking some steps before starting the course. At the beginning
of the academic year, you can collect clippings from newspapers and
magazines relating to different topics under the course — five year plans
and the role of NITI Aayog in planning; allocation of funds to various
sectors like agriculture, industry, services and for specific causes such
as poverty and employment; key issues of rural development,
x

environment, various infrastructure— health, education and energy;
and economic events in China and Pakistan. You may maintain these
clippings, and when the teacher starts teaching a particular topic, you
can cull out those news items, which you have collected from the
beginning of the course, and display/use them in the classroom. It is
necessary you to build this collection right from the beginning of the
course so that the relevent information is at hand as and when needed;
this habit will also come in handy during later stages of education.
The schools will have to buy a hard copy of the Economic Survey
for the latest year. You will notice that information relating to the Indian
Economy is updated in the Economic Survey. It is necessary for you to
familiarise yourselves with such reports and work on relevant activities.
The statistical tables available as Appendix in the Economic Survey
would be immensely helpful in understanding various issues.
While discussing a particular issue, discussion of the numerical
information about the issue is inevitable. For instance, when we talk of
growth rates — overall growth rates and growth of different sectors —
though it may be necessary for you to have a rough idea about the
trends in growth rates, the process involved in reaching the level of
growth and factors contributing to the trend rather than mere
reproduction of tabular data of growth rate.
You will notice numbered boxes in all chapters. These boxes
supplement the information given in the text. Through these boxes, an
attempt has been made to lend a humane touch and, thus, bring the
issue under discussion closer to real life. However, these boxes, as also
‘Work These Out’ activities, are not meant for examination/evaluation
purposes.
Besides the relatively conventional ‘Exercises’, each chapter has
‘Suggested Additional Activities’ at the end and ‘Work This/
These Out’ as part of the text; the more elaborate
activities of these can be treated as projects. You
may explore beyond the text while attempting
these activities.
Understandably, Information Technology facilities may not
be available in all the schools, however, it is important to take
note that various information relating to the Indian economy
are available on the internet. You need to learn to use the internet and
access the websites of various government departments to get the
required information. For instance, the details relating to poverty are
published by the NITI Aayog. You need to know that the NITI Aayog of
xi

the Government of India has a website in which various reports relating
to different aspects of India, including poverty, are available in the form
of reports. Since it may not be always possible to procure such reports
in hard copy, students and teachers may attempt to
download such reports from websites and use them in
the classroom.
The reports such as Economic Surveys of the last 10
years are available on the website: http://www.indiabudget.gov.in. Many
organisations change their website addresses. In case a website given in
this book is not accessible, kindly search those websites through search
engines such as Google (www.google.co.in).
For the first time, each chapter has been briefly summed up in the
‘Recap’ to facilitate learning. Also, please take note that sources for all
tables have not been given with the table as these tables were sourced
from various research material which have been covered under
‘References’ for each chapter.
We wish to reiterate the fact that the prime objective of this course
on Indian economy is to introduce the basic macro issues of the Indian
economy to the student community and to initiate a well-informed
debate on our economy. We also stress that collaborative learning is an
important aspect of this course, hence the involvement of students, as
well as, teachers in collecting information on the Indian economy from
other sources is necessary and such collected information should be
used as important inputs for both teaching, as well as, learning about
the Indian economy.
You can send your queries and feedback relating to any part of this book
to the following address.
Programme Coordinator (Economics)
Department of Education in Social Sciences
National Council of Educational Research and Training
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New Delhi 110 016.
Email: headdess@gmail.com

CONTENTS

UNIT I : DEVELOPMENT POLICIES AND EXPERIENCE (1947-1990)

1-35

CHAPTER 1: INDIAN ECONOMY ON THE EVE OF INDEPENDENCE
– LOW LEVEL OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT UNDER THE COLONIAL RULE
– AGRICULTURAL SECTOR
– INDUSTRIAL SECTOR
– FOREIGN TRADE
– DEMOGRAPHIC CONDITION
– OCCUPATIONAL STRUCTURE
– INFRASTRUCTURE

3
4
5
7
8
9
10
11

CHAPTER 2 : INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990
– THE GOALS OF FIVE YEAR PLANS
– AGRICULTURE
– INDUSTRY AND TRADE
– TRADE POLICY: IMPORT SUBSTITUTION

16
19
22
27
30

UNIT II : ECONOMIC REFORMS SINCE 1991

36-56

CHAPTER 3 : LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION : AN APPRAISAL
– BACKGROUND
– LIBERALISATION
– PRIVATISATION
– GLOBALISATION
– INDIAN ECONOMY DURING REFORMS: AN ASSESSMENT

UNIT III: CURRENT CHALLENGES FACING THE INDIAN ECONOMY
CHAPTER 4 : HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA
– WHAT IS HUMAN CAPITAL?
– SOURCES OF HUMAN CAPITAL

38
39
41
44
45
48

57-74
58
60
60

–
–
–
–

HUMAN CAPITAL AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
STATE OF HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA
EDUCATION SECTOR IN INDIA
FUTURE PROSPECTS

66
67
68
70

CHAPTER 5 : RURAL DEVELOPMENT
– WHAT IS RURAL DEVELOPMENT?
– CREDIT AND MARKETING IN RURAL AREAS
– AGRICULTURAL MARKET SYSTEM
– DIVERSIFICATION INTO PRODUCTIVE ACTIVITIES
– SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT AND ORGANIC FARMING

75-91
76
77
80
82
86

CHAPTER 6 : EMPLOYMENT: GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES
– WORKERS AND EMPLOYMENT
– PARTICIPATION OF PEOPLE IN EMPLOYMENT
– SELF-EMPLOYED AND HIRED WORKERS
– EMPLOYMENT IN FIRMS, FACTORIES AND OFFICES
– GROWTH AND CHANGING STRUCTURE OF EMPLOYMENT
– INFORMALISATION OF INDIAN WORKFORCE
– UNEMPLOYMENT
– GOVERNMENT AND EMPLOYMENT GENERATION

92-114
94
95
96
99
100
103
106
108

CHAPTER 7 : ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
– ENVIRONMENT — DEFINITION AND FUNCTIONS
– STATE OF INDIA’S ENVIRONMENT
– SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
– STRATEGIES FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

115-131
116
120
124
125

UNIT IV : DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA : A COMPARISON
WITH NEIGHBOURS
CHAPTER 8 : COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF
INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS
– DEVELOPMENTAL PATH — A SNAPSHOT VIEW
– DEMOGRAPHIC INDICATORS
xix

132-150
134
135
138

–
–
–

GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT AND SECTORS
INDICATORS OF HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIES — AN APPRAISAL

139
142
143
151-160

GLOSSARY

xv

Constitution of India
Part IV A (Article 51 A)

Fundamental Duties
It shall be the duty of every citizen of India —
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the
National Flag and the National Anthem;
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle
for freedom;
(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;
(d) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to
do so;
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all
the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or
sectional diversities; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of
women;
(f) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes,
rivers, wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures;
(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and
reform;
(i)

to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;

(j)

to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective
activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour
and achievement;

*(k) who is a parent or guardian, to provide opportunities for education to
his child or, as the case may be, ward between the age of six and
fourteen years.
Note: The Article 51A containing Fundamental Duties was inserted by the Constitution
(42nd Amendment) Act, 1976 (with effect from 3 January 1977).
*(k) was inserted by the Constitution (86th Amendment) Act, 2002 (with effect from
1 April 2010).

UNIT
UNIT

I
III
DEVELOPMENT POLICIES AND EXPERIENCE
(1947-90)

The two chapters in this unit give us an overview
of the state of the Indian economy as it was at the
eve of independence till after four decades of
planned development, which was a path that India
chose. This meant that the Government of India
had to take a series of steps such as the
establishment of the Planning Commission and
announcement of five year plans. An overview of
the goals of five year plans and a critical appraisal
of the merits and limitations of planned development
has been covered in this unit.

1

INDIAN ECONOMY
ON THE

EVE OF INDEPENDENCE

After studying this chapter, the learners will

•
•

become familiar with the state of the Indian economy in 1947, the
year of India’s Independence
understand the factors that led to the underdevelopment and
stagnation of the Indian economy.

“India is the pivot of our Empire... If the Empire loses any other part of its
Dominion we can survive, but if we lose India, the sun of our Empire will have
set.”
Victor Alexander Vruce, the Viceroy of British India in 1894

1.1 INTRODUCTION
The primary objective of this book,
Indian Economic Development, is to
familiarise you with the basic features
of the Indian economy, and its
development, as it is today, in the
aftermath of Independence. However, it
is equally important to know something
about the country’s economic past even
as you learn about its present state and
future prospects. So, let us first look at
the state of India’s economy prior to the
country’s independence and form an
idea of the various considerations that
shaped India’s post-independence
development strategy.
The structure of India’s presentday economy is not just of current
making; it has its roots steeped in
history, particularly in the period when
India was under British rule which
lasted for almost two centuries before
India finally won its independence on
15 August 1947. The sole purpose of
the British colonial rule in India was
to reduce the country to being a raw
material supplier for Great Britain’s

own rapidly expanding modern
industrial base. An understanding of
the exploitative nature of this
relationship is essential for any
assessment of the kind and level of
development which the Indian
economy has been able to attain over
the last seven and half decades. 1.2

1.2

LOW LEVEL OF ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT UNDER THE
COLONIAL RULE

India had an independent economy
before the advent of the British rule.
Though agriculture was the main
source of livelihood for most people,
yet, the country’s economy was
characterised by various kinds of
manufacturing activities. India was
particularly well known for its
handicraft industries in the fields of
cotton and silk textiles, metal and
precious stone works etc. These
products enjoyed a worldwide market
based on the reputation of the fine
quality of material used and the high
standards of craftsmanship seen in all
imports from India (See Box 1.1).

Box 1.1: Textile Industry in Bengal
Muslin is a type of cotton textile which had its origin in Bengal, particularly,
places in and around Dhaka (spelled during the pre-independence period as
Dacca), now the capital city of Bangladesh. ‘Daccai Muslin’ had gained worldwide
fame as an exquisite type of cotton textile. The finest variety of muslin was
called malmal. Sometimes, foreign travellers also used to refer to it as malmal
shahi or malmal khas implying that it was worn by, or fit for, the royalty.

4

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

The economic policies pursued by
the colonial government in India were
concerned more with the protection
and promotion of the economic
interests of their home country than
with the development of the Indian
economy. Such policies brought about
a fundamental change in the structure
of the Indian economy — transforming
the country into supplier of raw
materials and consumer of finished
industrial products from Britain.
Obviously, the colonial government never made any sincere
attempt to estimate India’s national
and p e r c a p i t a i n c o m e. Some
individual attempts which were
made to measure such incomes
yielded conflicting and inconsistent
results. Among the notable estimators
— Dadabhai Naoroji, William Digby,
Findlay Shirras, V.K.R.V. Rao and

R.C. Desai — it was Rao, whose
estimates during the colonial period
was considered very significant.
However, most studies did find that
the country’s growth of aggregate real
output during the first half of the
twentieth century was less than two
per cent coupled with a meagre half
per cent growth in per capita output
per year.

1.3 AGRICULTURAL SECTOR
India’s economy under the British
colonial rule remained fundamentally
agrarian — about 85 per cent
of the country’s population lived
mostly in villages and derived
livelihood directly or indirectly from
agriculture (See Box 1.2). However,
despite being the occupation of such
a large population, the agricultural

Box 1.2: Agriculture During
Pre-British India
The French traveller, Bernier, described
seventeenth century Bengal in the
following way: “The knowledge I have
acquired of Bengal in two visits inclines
me to believe that it is richer than Egypt.
It exports, in abundance, cottons and
silks, rice, sugar and butter. It produces
amply — for its own consumption —
wheat, vegetables, grains, fowls, ducks
and geese. It has immense herds of pigs
and flocks of sheep and goats. Fish of
every kind it has in profusion. From
rajmahal to the sea is an endless
number of canals, cut in bygone ages
from the Ganges by immense labour for
navigation and irrigation.”

Fig. 1.1 India’s agricultural stagnation
under the British colonial rule

Ø Take note of the agricultural prosperity in our country in the seventeenth century. Contrast it
with agricultural stagnation around the time when the British left India, around 200 years later.

INDIAN ECONOMY ON THE EVE OF INDEPENDENCE

5

sector continued to experience
stagnation and, not infrequently,
unusual deterioration. Agricultural
pro-ductivity became low though, in
absolute terms, the sector experienced
some growth due to the expansion of
the aggregate area under cultivation.
This stagnation in the agricultural
sector was caused mainly because of
the various systems of l a n d
settlement that were introduced by
the colonial government. Particularly,
under the zamindari system which
was implemented in the then Bengal
Presidency comprising parts of
India’s present-day eastern states,
the profit accruing out of the
agriculture sector went to the
zamindars instead of the cultivators.
However, a considerable number of
zamindars, and not just the colonial
government, did nothing to improve
the condition of agriculture. The main

interest of the zamindars was only to
collect rent regardless of the
economic condition of the cultivators;
this caused immense misery and
social tension among the latter. To a
very great extent, the terms of the
revenue settlement were also
responsible for the zamindars
adopting such an attitude; dates for
depositing specified sums of revenue
were fixed, failing which the
zamindars were to lose their rights.
Besides this, low levels of technology,
lack of irrigation facilities and
negligible use of fertilisers, all added
up to aggravate the plight of the
farmers and contributed to the
d i s m a l level of agricultural
productivity. There was, of course,
some evidence of a relatively higher
yield of cash crops in certain
areas of the country due to
commercialisation of agriculture.

Work These Out

6

Ø

Compare the map of British India with that of independent India and find
out the areas that became parts of Pakistan. Why were those parts so
important to India from the economic point of view? (Refer, to your
advantage, Dr Rajendra Prasad’s book, India Divided).

Ø

What were the various forms of revenue settlement adopted by the British
in India? Where did they implement them and to what effect? How far do
you think those settlements have a bearing on the current agricultural
scenario in India? (In your attempt to find answers to these questions, you
may refer to Ramesh Chandra Dutt’s Economic History of India, which comes
in three volumes, and B.H. Baden-Powell’s The Land Systems of British
India, also in two volumes. For better comprehension of the subject, you
can also try and develop an illustrated agrarian map of British India either
by hand or with the help of your school computer. Remember, nothing
helps better than an illustrated map to understand the subject at hand).

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

But this could hardly help farmers in
improving their economic condition
as, instead of producing food crops,
now they were producing cash crops
which were to be ultimately used by
British industries back home. Despite
some progress made in irrigation,
India’s agriculture was starved of
investment in terracing, flood-control,
drainage and desalinisation of soil.
While a small section of farmers
changed their cropping pattern from
food crops to commercial crops, a large
section of tenants, small farmers and
sharecroppers neither had resources
and technology nor had incentive to
invest in agriculure.

1.4 INDUSTRIAL SECTOR
As in the case of agriculture, so also
in manufacturing, India could not
develop a sound industrial base under
the colonial rule. Even as the country’s
world famous handicraft industries
declined, no corresponding modern
industrial base was allowed to come
up to take pride of place so long
enjoyed by the former. The primary
motive of the colonial government
behind this policy of systematically deindustrialising India was two-fold. The
intention was, first, to reduce India to
the status of a mere exporter of
important raw materials for the
upcoming modern industries in
Britain and, second, to turn India into
a sprawling market for the finished
products of those industries so that
their continued expansion could be
ensured to the maximum advantage of

their home country — Britain. In the
unfolding economic scenario, the
decline of the indigenous handicraft
industries created not only massive
unemployment in India but also a new
demand in the Indian consumer
market, which was now deprived of the
supply of locally made goods. This
demand was profitably met by the
increasing imports of cheap
manufactured goods from Britain.
During the second half of the
nineteenth century, modern industry
began to take root in India but its
progress remained very slow.
Initially, this development was
confined to the setting up of cotton
and jute textile mills. The cotton
textile mills, mainly dominated by
Indians, were located in the western
parts of the country, namely,
Maharashtra and Gujarat, while
the jute mills dominated by the
foreigners were mainly concentrated
in Bengal. Subsequently, the iron
and steel industries began coming up
in the beginning of the twentieth
century. The Tata Iron and Steel
Company (TISCO) was incorporated
in 1907. A few other industries in the
fields of sugar, cement, paper etc.
came up after the Second World War.
However, there was hardly any
capital goods industry to help
promote further industrialisation in
India. Capital goods industry means
industries which can produce machine
tools which are, in turn, used for
producing articles for current
consumption. The establishment of a
few manufacturing units here and

INDIAN ECONOMY ON THE EVE OF INDEPENDENCE

7

Work These Out

Ø Prepare a list showing where and when other modern industries of India
were first set up. Can you also find out what the basic requirements are for
setting up any modern industry? What, for example, might have been the
reasons for the setting up of the Tata Iron and Steel Company at Jamshedpur,
which is now in the state of Jharkhand?

Ø How many iron and steel factories are there in India at present? Are these
iron and steel factories among the best in the world or do you think that
these factories need restructuring and upgradation? If yes, how can this be
done? There is an argument that industries which are not strategic in nature
should not continue to be in the public sector. What is your view?

Ø On a map of India, mark the cotton textiles, jute mills and textile mills that
existed at the time of independence.

there was no substitute to the near
wholesale displacement of the
country’s traditional handicraft
industries. Furthermore, the growth
rate of the new industrial sector and
its contribution to the Gross Domestic
Product (GDP) or Gross Value Added
remained very small. Another
significant drawback of the new
industrial sector was the very limited
area of operation of the public sector.
This sector remained confined only to
the railways, power generation,
communications, ports and some
other departmental undertakings.

1.5 FOREIGN TRADE
India has been an important trading
nation since ancient times. But the
restrictive policies of commodity
production, trade and tariff pursued
by the colonial government adversely
affected the structure, composition and
volume of India’s foreign trade.
Consequently, India became an
8

exporter of primary products such as
raw silk, cotton, wool, sugar, indigo,
jute etc. and an importer of finished
consumer goods like cotton, silk and
woollen clothes and capital goods like
light machinery produced in the
factories of Britain. For all practical
purposes, Britain maintained a
monopoly control over India’s exports
and imports. As a result, more than
half of India’s foreign trade was
restricted to Britain while the rest was
allowed with a few other countries like
China, Ceylon (Sri Lanka) and Persia
(Iran). The opening of the Suez Canal
further intensified British control over
India’s foreign trade (see Box 1.3).
The most important characteristic
of India’s foreign trade throughout the
colonial period was the generation of
a large export surplus. But this
surplus came at a huge cost to the
country’s economy. Several essential
commodities —food grains, clothes,
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Work These Out

Ø Prepare a list of items that were exported from and imported into India during
the British rule.

Ø Collect information from the Economic Survey for various years published
by the Ministry of Finance, Government of India, on various items of export
from India and its imports. Compare these with imports and exports from
the pre-independence era. Also find out the names of prominent ports which
now handle the bulk of India’s foreign trade.

kerosene etc. — were scarcely available
in the domestic market. Furthermore,
this export surplus did not result in
any flow of gold or silver into India.
Rather, this was used to make
payments for the expenses incurred by
an office set up by the colonial
government in Britain, expenses on
war, again fought by the British
government, and the import of invisible

Not to
to scale
scale
Not

Fig.1.2 Suez Canal: Used as highway
between India and Britain

items, all of which led to the drain of
Indian wealth.

1.6 DEMOGRAPHIC CONDITION
Various details about the population
of British India were first collected
through a census in 1881. Though
suffering from certain limitations, it
revealed the unevenness in India’s
population growth. Subsequently,

Box 1.3: Trade Through the Suez
Canal
Suez Canal is an artificial waterway
running from north to south across the
Isthmus of Suez in north-eastern
Egypt. It connects Port Said on the
Mediterranean Sea with the Gulf of
Suez, an arm of the Red Sea. The canal
provides a direct trade route for ships
operating between European or
American ports and ports located in
South Asia, East Africa and Oceania by
doing away with the need to sail around
Africa. Strategically and economically,
it is one of the most important
waterways in the world. Its opening in
1869 reduced the cost of transportation
and made access to the Indian market
easier.

INDIAN ECONOMY ON THE EVE OF INDEPENDENCE

9

every ten years such census operations
were carried out. Before 1921, India
was in the first stage of demographic
transition. The second stage of
transition began after 1921. However,
neither the total population of India nor
the rate of population growth at this
stage was very high.
The various social development
indicators were also not quite
encouraging. The overall literacy level
was less than 16 per cent. Out of this,
the female literacy level was at a
negligible low of about seven per
cent. Public health facilities were
either unavailable to large chunks of
population or, when available, were
highly inadequate. Consequently,
water and air-borne diseases were
rampant and took a huge toll on
life. No wonder, the overall mortality
rate was very high and in that,

particularly, the infant mortality
rate was quite alarming —about 218
per thousand in contrast to the
present infant mortality rate of 33 per
thousand. Life expectancy was also
very low — 32 years in contrast to the
present 69 years. In the absence of
reliable data, it is difficult to specify the
extent of poverty at that time but there
is no doubt that extensive poverty
prevailed in India during the colonial
period which contributed to the
worsening profile of India’s population
of the time.

1.7 OCCUPATIONAL STRUCTURE
During the colonial period, the
occupational structure of India, i.e.,
distribution of working persons
across different industries and
sectors, showed little sign of change.
The agricultural sector accounted for

Fig. 1.3 A large section of India’s population did not have basic needs such as housing

10

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Work These Out

Ø Can

you find out the
reasons behind frequent
occurrence of famines in
India before independence?
You may read from Nobel
Laureate Amartya Sen’s
book, Poverty and Famines.
Ø Prepare a pie chart for
the occupational structure
in India at the time of
independence.

the largest share of workforce, which
usually remained at a high of 70-75
per cent while the manufacturing and
the services sectors accounted for only
10 and 15-20 per cent respectively.
Another striking aspect was the
growing regional variation. Parts
of the then Madras Presidency
(comprising areas of the present-day
states of Tamil Nadu, Andhra
Pradesh, Kerala and Karnataka),
Bombay and Bengal witnessed a
decline in the dependence of the
workforce on the agricultural sector
with a commensurate increase in the
manufacturing and the services
sectors. However, there had been an
increase in the share of workforce in
agriculture during the same time in
states such as Orissa, Rajasthan and
Punjab.

1.8 INFRASTRUCTURE
Under the colonial regime, basic
infrastructure such as railways,
ports, water transport, posts and

telegraphs did develop. However, the
real motive behind this development
was not to provide basic amenities to
the people but to subserve various
colonial interests. Roads constructed
in India prior to the advent of the
British rule were not fit for modern
transport. The roads that were built
primarily served the purposes of
mobilising the army within India and
drawing out raw materials from the
countryside to the nearest railway
station or the port to send these to
far away England or other lucrative
foreign destinations. There always
remained an acute shortage of allweather roads to reach out to the
rural areas during the rainy season.
Naturally, therefore, people mostly
living in these areas suffered
grievously during natural calamities
and famines.
The British introduced the
railways in India in 1850 and it is
considered as one of their most
important contributions. The
railways affected the structure of the
Indian economy in two important
ways. On the one hand it enabled
people to undertake long distance
travel
and
thereby
break
geographical and cultural barriers
while, on the other hand, it fostered
commercialisation
of
Indian
agriculture which adversely affected
the self-sufficiency of the village
economies in India. The volume of
India’s
exports
undoubtedly
expanded but its benefits rarely
accrued to the Indian people.
The social benefits, which the

INDIAN ECONOMY ON THE EVE OF INDEPENDENCE

11

Fig. 1.4 First Railway Bridge linking Bombay with Thane, 1854

Indian people gained owing to the
introduction of the railways, were
thus outweighed by the country’s
huge economic loss.
Along with the development of
roads and railways, the colonial
dispensation also took measures for
developing the inland trade and sea
lanes. However, these measures were
far from satisfactory. The inland
waterways, at times, also proved
uneconomical as in the case of the
Coast Canal on the Orissa coast.
Though the canal was built at a huge

Fig.1.5 Tata Airlines, a division of Tata and
Sons, was established in 1932
inaugurating the aviation sector in India
12

Work This Out

Ø There is a perception still
going around that in
m a n y ways the British
administration in India
was quite beneficial. This
perception
needs
an
informed debate. How
would you look at this
perception? Argue this
out in your class — ‘Was
the British Raj good for
India’?

cost to the government exchequer, yet,
it failed to compete with the railways,
which soon traversed the region
running parallel to the canal, and had
to be ultimately abandoned. The
introduction of the expensive system
of electric telegraph in India, similarly,
served the purpose of maintaining law
and order. The postal services, on the
other hand, despite serving a useful
public purpose, remained all through
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

inadequate. You will learn more about
the present status of various
infrastructure in Chapter 8.

1.9 CONCLUSION
By the time India won its independence,
the impact of the two-century long
British colonial rule was already
showing on all aspects of the Indian
economy. The agricultural sector was
already saddled with surplus labour
and extremely low productivity. The
industrial sector was crying for

modernisation, diversification, capacity
building and increased public
investment. Foreign trade was oriented
to feed the Industrial Revolution in
Britain. Infrastructure facilities,
including the famed railway network,
needed upgradation, expansion and
public orientation. Prevalence of
rampant poverty and unemployment
required welfare orientation of public
economic policy. In a nutshell, the
social and economic challenges before
the country were enormous.

Recap

Ø An understanding of the economy before independence is necessary to
know and appreciate the level of development achieved during the postindependence period.

Ø Under the colonial dispensation, the economic policies of the government
were concerned more with the protection and promotion of British
economic interests than with the need to develop the economic condition
of the colonised country and its people.

Ø The agricultural sector continued to experience stagnation and
deterioration despite the fact that the largest section of Indian population
depended on it for sustenance.

Ø The rule of the British-India government led to the collapse of India’s
world famous handicraft industries without contributing, in any
significant manner, to its replacement by a modern industrial base.

Ø Lack of adequate public health facilities, occurrence of frequent natural
calamities and famines pauperised the hapless Indian people and
resulted in engendering high mortality rates.

Ø Some efforts were made by the colonial regime to improve infrastructure
facilities but these efforts were spiced with selfish motives. However, the
independent Indian government had to built on this base through
planning.

INDIAN ECONOMY ON THE EVE OF INDEPENDENCE

13

EXERCISES

14

1.

What was the focus of the economic policies pursued by the colonial
government in India? What were the impacts of these policies?

2.

Name some notable economists who estimated India’s per capita
income during the colonial period.

3.

What were the main causes of India’s agricultural stagnation during
the colonial period?

4.

Name some modern industries which were in operation in our country
at the time of independence.

5.

What was the two-fold motive behind the systematic deindustrialisation effected by the British in pre-independent India?

6.

The traditional handicrafts industries were ruined under the British
rule. Do you agree with this view? Give reasons in support of your
answer.

7.

What objectives did the British intend to achieve through their
policies of infrastructure development in India?

8.

Critically appraise some of the shortfalls of the industrial policy
pursued by the British colonial administration.

9.

What do you understand by the drain of Indian wealth during the
colonial period?

10.

Which is regarded as the defining year to mark the demographic
transition from its first to the second decisive stage?

11.

Give a quantitative appraisal of India’s demographic profile during
the colonial period.

12.

Highlight the salient features of India’s pre-independence occupational
structure.

13.

Underscore some of India’s most crucial economic challenges at the
time of independence.

14.

When was India’s first official census operation undertaken?

15.

Indicate the volume and direction of trade at the time of
independence.

16.

Were there any positive contributions made by the British in India?
Discuss.
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES

1.

Prepare a list of goods and services that were available to people in
pre-independence India in rural and urban areas. Compare it with
the consumption pattern of such goods and services by the people
today. Highlight the perceptible difference in the people’s standard
of living.

2.

Find pictures of towns/villages, in your vicinity, of the preindependence period and compare these with their present scenario.
What changes can you mark? Are such changes for better or for
worse? Discuss.

3.

Rally around your teacher and organise a group discussion on ‘Has
the zamindari system really been abolished in India’? If the
consensus is negative, then what measures would you think should
be taken to banish it and why?

4.

Identify the major occupations followed by the people of our country
at the time of independence. What major occupations do the people
follow today? In the light of reform policies, how would you visualise
the occupational scenario in India 15 years from now — say, 2035?
REFERENCES

BADEN-POWELL, B.H. 1892. The Land Systems of British India, Vols I, II and
III. Oxford Clarendon Press, Oxford.
BUCHANAN, D.H. 1966. Development of Capitalist Enterprise in India. Frank
Cass and Co, London.
CHANDRA, BIPAN. 1993. ‘The Colonial Legacy’ in Bimal Jalan (Ed.), The Indian
Economy: Problems and Prospects. Penguin Books, New Delhi.
D UTT, R.C. 1963. Economic History of India, Vols I and II. Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting, Government of India, New Delhi.
KUMAR, D. AND MEGHNAD DESAI (Eds.). 1983. Cambridge Economic History of
India. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
M ILL, JAMES.1972. History of British India. Associated Publishing House,
New Delhi.
PRASAD, RAJENDRA. 1946. India Divided. Hind Kitabs, Bombay.
SEN, AMARTYA. 1999. Poverty and Famines. Oxford University Press, New Delhi.
Government Reports
Economic Survey (for various years). Ministry of Finance, Government of India.
INDIAN ECONOMY ON THE EVE OF INDEPENDENCE

15

2

INDIAN ECONOMY
1950–1990

After studying this chapter, the learners will
•

come to know the goals of India’s five year plans

•

know about the development policies in different sectors such as
agriculture and industry from 1950-1990

•

learn to think about the merits and limitations of a regulated economy.

The central objective of Planning in India... is to initiate a process of
development which will raise the living standards and open out to the people
new opportunities for a richer and more varied life.
First Five Year Plan

2.1 INTRODUCTION
On 15 August 1947, India woke to a
new dawn of freedom. Finally we were
masters of our own destiny after
some two hundred years of British
rule; the job of nation building was
now in our own hands. The leaders
of independent India had to decide,
among other things, the type of
economic system most suitable for
our nation, a system which would
promote the welfare of all rather than
a few. There are different types of
economic systems (see Box 2.1) and
among them, socialism appealed to
Jawaharlal Nehru the most. However,
he was not in favour of the kind of
socialism established in the former
Soviet Union where all the means of
production, i.e. all the factories and
farms in the country, were owned by
the government. There was no private
property. It is not possible in a
democracy like India for the
government to change the ownership
pattern of land and other properties
of its citizens in the way that it was
done in the former Soviet Union.
Nehru, and many other leaders and
thinkers of the newly independent
India, sought an alternative to the
extreme versions of capitalism and
socialism. Basically sympathising with
the socialist outlook, they found the
INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990

answer in an economic system which,
in their view, combined the best
features of socialism without its
drawbacks. In this view, India would
be a socialist society with a strong
public sector but also with private
property and democracy; the government
would plan (see Box 2.2) for the
Work These Out

Ø Prepare a chart on the
different types of economic
systems prevalent in the
world. List out the countries
as capitalist, socialist and
mixed economy.

Ø Plan a class trip to an
agriculture farm. Divide the
class into seven groups with
each group to plan a specific
goal, for example, the
purpose of the visit, money
expenditure involved, time
taken, resources, people
accompanying the group
and who need to be
contacted, possible places
of visit, possible questions
to be asked etc. Now, with
the help of your teacher,
compile these specific goals
and compare with long-term
goals of successful visit to
an agricultural farm.

17

Box 2.1: Types of Economic Systems
Every society has to answer three questions
Ø What goods and services should be produced in the country?

Ø How should the goods and services be produced? Should producers use
more human labour or more capital (machines) for producing things?

ØHow should the goods and services be distributed among people?
One answer to these questions is to depend on the market forces of
supply and demand. In a market economy, also called capitalism, only those
consumer goods will be produced that are in demand, i.e., goods that can
be sold profitably either in the domestic or in the foreign markets. If cars
are in demand, cars will be produced and if bicycles are in demand, bicycles
will be produced. If labour is cheaper than capital, more labour-intensive
methods of production will be used and vice-versa. In a capitalist society
the goods produced are distributed among people not on the basis of what
people need but on the basis of Purchasing Power—the ability to buy goods
and services. That is, one has to have the money in the pocket to buy it. Low
cost housing for the poor is much needed but will not count as demand in
the market sense because the poor do not have the purchasing power to
back the demand. As a result this commodity will not be produced and
supplied as per market forces. Such a society did not appeal to Jawaharlal
Nehru, our first prime minister, for it meant that the great majority of people
of the country would be left behind without the chance to improve their
quality of life.
A socialist society answers the three questions in a totally different
manner. In a socialist society the government decides what goods are to be
produced in accordance with the needs of society. It is assumed that the
government knows what is good for the people of the country and so the
desires of individual consumers are not given much importance. The
government decides how goods are to be produced and how they should be
distributed. In principle, distribution under socialism is supposed to be based
on what people need and not on what they can afford to purchase. Unlike
under capitalism, for example, a socialist nation provides free health care
to all its citizens. Strictly, a socialist society has no private property since
everything is owned by the state. In Cuba and China, for example, most of
the economic activities are governed by the socialistic principles.
Most economies are mixed economies, i.e. the government and the
market together answer the three questions of what to produce, how to
produce and how to distribute what is produced. In a mixed economy, the
market will provide whatever goods and services it can produce well, and
the government will provide essential goods and services which the market
fails to do.

18

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Box 2.2: What is a Plan?
A plan spells out how the resources of a nation should be put to use. It
should have some general goals as well as specific objectives which are to
be achieved within a specified period of time; in India plans were of five
years duration and were called five year plans (we borrowed this from the
former Soviet Union, the pioneer in national planning). Our plan documents
upto the year 2017 not only specify the objectives to be attained in the five
years of a plan but also what is to be achieved over a period of twenty years.
This long-term plan is called ‘perspective plan’. The five year plans were
supposed to provide the basis for the perspective plan.
It will be unrealistic to expect all the goals of a plan to be given equal
importance in all the plans. In fact the goals may actually be in conflict. For
example, the goal of introducing modern technology may be in conflict with
the goal of increasing employment if the technology reduces the need for
labour. The planners have to balance the goals, a very difficult job indeed.
We find different goals being emphasised in different plans in India.
India’s five year plans did not spell out how much of each and every
good and service is to be produced. This is neither possible nor necessary
(the former Soviet Union tried to do this and failed). It is enough if the plan
is specific about the sectors where it plays a commanding role, for instance,
power generation and irrigation, while leaving the rest to the market.

economy with the private sector being
encouraged to be part of the plan effort.
The ‘Industrial Policy Resolution’ of
1948 and the Directive Principles of
the Indian Constitution reflected
this outlook. In 1950, the Planning
Commission was set up with the
Prime Minister as its Chairperson. The
era of five year plans had begun.

2.2 THE GOALS OF FIVE YEAR PLANS
A plan should have some clearly
specified goals. The goals of the five
year plans were: growth, modernisation,
self-reliance and equity. This does not
mean that all the plans have given
equal importance to all these goals.
Due to limited resources, a choice has
to be made in each plan about which
INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990

of the goals is to be given primary
importance. Nevertheless, the planners
have to ensure that, as far as possible,
the policies of the plans do not
contradict these four goals. Let us now
learn about the goals of planning in
some detail.
Growth: It refers to increase in the
country’s capacity to produce the
output of goods and services within
the country. It implies either a
larger stock of productive capital,
or a larger size of supporting
services like transport and
banking, or an increase in the
efficiency of productive capital and
services. A good indicator of
economic growth, in the language of
19

Box 2.3: Mahalanobis: the Architect of Indian Planning
Many distinguished thinkers contributed to the formulation of India’s five
year plans. Among them, the name of the statistician, Prasanta Chandra
Mahalanobis, stands out.
Planning, in the real sense of the term, began with the Second Five Year
Plan. The Second Plan, a landmark contribution to development planning
in general, laid down the basic ideas regarding
goals of Indian planning; this plan was based
on the ideas of Mahalanobis. In that sense, he
can be regarded as the architect of Indian
planning.
Mahalanobis was born in 1893 in Calcutta.
He was educated at the Presidency College in
Calcutta and at Cambridge University in
England. His contributions to the subject of
statistics brought him international fame. In
1945 he was made a Fellow (member) of
Britain’s Royal Society, one of the most
prestigious organisations of scientists; only the
most outstanding scientists are made
members of this Society.
Mahalanobis established the Indian
Statistical Institute (ISI) in Calcutta and
started a journal, Sankhya, which still serves
as a respected forum for statisticians to
discuss their ideas. Both, the ISI and Sankhya, are highly regarded by
statisticians and economists all over the world to this day.
During the second plan period, Mahalanobis invited many
distinguished economists from India and abroad to advise him on India’s
economic development. Some of these economists became Nobel Prize winners
later, which shows that he could identify individuals with talent. Among
the economists invited by Mahalanobis were those who were very critical of
the socialist principles of the second plan. In other words, he was willing to
listen to what his critics had to say, the mark of a great scholar.
Many economists today reject the approach to planning formulated by
Mahalanobis but he will always be remembered for playing a vital role in
putting India on the road to economic progress, and statisticians continue
to profit from his contribution to statistical theory.
Source: Sukhamoy Chakravarty, ‘Mahalanobis, Prasanta Chandra’ in John
Eatwell et.al, (Eds.) The New Palgrave Dictionary: Economic
Development, W.W. Norton, New York and London.

20

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Box 2.4: The Service Sector
As a country develops, it undergoes ‘structural change’. In the case of India,
the structural change is peculiar. Usually, with development, the share of
agriculture declines and the share of industry becomes dominant. At higher
levels of development, the service sector contributes more to the GDP than the
other two sectors. In India, the share of agriculture in the GDP was more than
50 per cent—as we would expect for a poor country. But by 1990 the share of
the service sector was 40.59 per cent, more than that of agriculture or industry,
like what we find in developed nations. This phenomenon of growing share of
the service sector was accelerated in the post 1991 period (this marked the
onset of globalisation in the country which will be discussed in chapter 3).

economics, is steady increase in the
Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The
GDP is the market value of all the
final goods and services produced in
the country during a year. You have
studied this concept in Class X as
well. You can think of the GDP as a
cake and growth is increase in the
size of the cake. If the cake is larger,
more people can enjoy it. It is
necessary to produce more goods
and services if the people of India are
to enjoy (in the words of the First Five
Year Plan) a more rich and varied life.
The GDP of a country is derived
from the different sectors of the
economy, namely the agricultural
sector, the industrial sector and the
service sector. The contribution
made by each of these sectors makes
up the structural composition of
the economy. In some countries,
growth in agriculture contributes
more to the GDP growth, while in
some countries the growth in the
service sector contributes more to
GDP growth (see Box 2.4).
Modernisation: To increase the
production of goods and services
INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990

the producers have to adopt new
technology. For example, a farmer can
increase the output on the farm by
using new seed varieties instead of
using the old ones. Similarly, a factory
can increase output by using a new
type of machine. Adoption of new
technology is called modernisation.
However, modernisation does not
refer only to the use of new technology
but also to changes in social outlook
such as the recognition that women
should have the same rights as men. In
a traditional society, women are
supposed to remain at home while men
work. A modern society makes use of
the talents of women in the work place
— in banks, factories, schools etc. —
and such a society in most occassions
is also prosperous.
Self-reliance: A nation can promote
economic growth and modernisation
by using its own resources or by
using resources imported from other
nations. The first seven five year plans
gave importance to self-reliance
which means avoiding imports
of those goods which could be
21

Work These Out

Ø Discuss in your class the changes in technology used for
(a) Production of food grains
(b) Packaging of products
(c) Mass communication
Ø Find out and prepare a list of major items that India imported and exported
during 1990-91 and 2018-19. (For this, see P. 192 also).
(a) Observe the difference
(b) Do you see the impact of self-reliance? Discuss.
For getting these details you may refer to Economic Survey of the latest year.

produced in India itself. This policy
was considered a necessity in order to
reduce our dependence on foreign
countries, especially for food. It is
understandable that people who were
recently freed from foreign domination
should give importance to selfreliance. Further, it was feared that
dependence on imported food
supplies, foreign technology and
foreign capital may make India’s
sovereignty vulnerable to foreign
interference in our policies.

needs such as food, a decent house,
education and health care and
inequality in the distribution of wealth
should be reduced.
Let us now see how the first seven
five year plans, covering the period
1950-1990, attempted to attain these
four goals and the extent to which
they succeeded in doing so, with
reference to agriculture, industry
and trade. You will study the policies
and developmental issues taken up
after 1991 in Chapter 3.

Equity: Now growth, modernisation
and self-reliance, by themselves, may
not improve the kind of life which
people are living. A country can have
high growth, the most modern
technology developed in the country
itself, and also have most of its people
living in poverty. It is important to
ensure that the benefits of economic
prosperity reach the poor sections as
well instead of being enjoyed only by
the rich. So, in addition to growth,
modernisation and self-reliance,
equity is also important. Every Indian
should be able to meet his or her basic

2.3 AGRICULTURE

22

You have learnt in Chapter 1 that
during the colonial rule there was
neither growth nor equity in the
agricultural sector. The policy makers
of independent India had to address
these issues which they did through
land reforms and promoting the use
of ‘High Yielding Variety’ (HYV) seeds
which ushered in a revolution in
Indian agriculture.
Land Reforms: At the time of
independence, the land tenure system
was characterised by intermediaries
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Box 2.5: Ownership and Incentives
The policy of ‘land to the tiller’ is based on the idea that the cultivators will
take more interest — they will have more incentive — in increasing output if
they are the owners of the land. This is because ownership of land enables the
tiller to make profit from the increased output. Tenants do not have the incentive
to make improvements on land since it is the landowner who would benefit
more from higher output. The importance of ownership in providing incentives
is well illustrated by the carelessness with which farmers in the former Soviet
Union used to pack fruits for sale. It was not uncommon to see farmers packing
rotten fruits along with fresh fruits in the same box. Now, every farmer knows
that the rotten fruits will spoil the fresh fruits if they are packed together. This
will be a loss to the farmer since the fruits cannot be sold. So why did the
Soviet farmers do something which would so obviously result in loss for them?
The answer lies in the incentives facing the farmers. Since farmers in the
former Soviet Union did not own any land, they neither enjoyed the profits nor
suffered the losses. In the absence of ownership, there was no incentive on
the part of farmers to be efficient, which also explains the poor performance of
the agricultural sector in the Soviet Union despite availability of vast areas of
highly fertile land.
Source: Thomas Sowell, Basic Economics: A Citizen’s Guide to the Economy,
New York: Basic Books, 2004, Second Edition.

(variously called zamindars, jagirdars
etc.) who merely collected rent from
the actual tillers of the soil without
contributing towards improvements
on the farm. The low productivity of
the agricultural sector forced India to
import food from the United States of
America (U.S.A.). Equity in agriculture
called for land reforms which primarily
refer to change in the ownership of
landholdings. Just a year after
independence, steps were taken to
abolish intermediaries and to make the
tillers the owners of land. The idea
behind this move was that ownership
of land would give incentives (see Box
2.5) to the tillers to invest in making
improvements provided sufficient
capital was made available to them.
INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990

Land ceiling was another policy to
promote equity in the agricultural
sector. This means fixing the maximum
size of land which could be owned by
an individual. The purpose of land
ceiling was to reduce the concentration
of land ownership in a few hands.
The abolition of intermediaries
meant that some 200 lakh tenants
came into direct contact with the
government — they were thus
freed from being exploited by the
zamindars. The ownership conferred
on tenants gave them the incentive to
increase output and this contributed
to growth in agriculture. However, the
goal of equity was not fully served
by abolition of intermediaries. In
some areas the former zamindars
23

continued to own large areas of land
by making use of some loopholes in
the legislation; there were cases
where tenants were evicted and the
landowners claimed to be selfcultivators (the actual tillers), claiming
ownership of the land; and even when
the tillers got ownership of land, the
poorest of the agricultural labourers
(such as sharecroppers and landless
labourers) did not benefit from land
reforms.
The land ceiling legislation also
faced hurdles. The big landlords
challenged the legislation in the
courts, delaying its implementation.
They used this delay to register their
lands in the name of close relatives,
thereby escaping from the
legislation. The legislation also had
a lot of loopholes which were
exploited by the big landholders to
retain their land. Land reforms were
s u c c e s s f u l i n K e r a l a a n d We s t
Bengal because these states had
governments committed to the policy
of land to the tiller. Unfortunately
other states did not have the same
level of commitment and vast
inequality in landholding continues
to this day.
The Green Revolution: At
independence, about 75 per cent of
the country’s population was
dependent
on
agriculture.
Productivity in the agricultural sector
was very low because of the use of old
technology and the absence of
required infrastructure for the vast
majority of farmers. India’s
agriculture vitally depends on the
24

monsoon and if the monsoon fell short
the farmers were in trouble unless
they had access to irrigation facilities
which very few had. The stagnation in
agriculture during the colonial rule
was permanently broken by the green
revolution. This refers to the large
increase in production of food grains
resulting from the use of high yielding
variety (HYV) seeds especially for
wheat and rice. The use of these seeds
required the use of fertiliser and
pesticide in the correct quantities as
well as regular supply of water; the
application of these inputs in correct
proportions is vital. The farmers who
could benefit from HYV seeds required
reliable irrigation facilities as well as
the financial resources to purchase
fertiliser and pesticide. As a result, in
the first phase of the green revolution
(approximately mid 1960s upto mid
1970s), the use of HYV seeds was
restricted to the more affluent states
such as Punjab, Andhra Pradesh and
Tamil Nadu. Further, the use of HYV
seeds primarily benefited the wheatgrowing regions only. In the second
phase of the green revolution
(mid-1970s to mid-1980s), the HYV
technology spread to a larger number
of states and benefited more variety
of crops. The spread of green
revolution technology enabled India
to achieve self-sufficiency in food
grains; India no longer had to be
at the mercy of America, or any
other nation, for meeting its food
requirements.
Growth in agricultural output is
important but it is not enough. If a
large proportion of this increase is
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

consumed by the farmers themselves
instead of being sold in the market,
the higher output will not make much
of a difference to the economy as a
whole. If, on the other hand, a
substantial amount of agricultural
produce is sold in the market by the
farmers, the higher output can make
a difference to the economy. The
portion of agricultural produce which
is sold in the market by the farmers
is called marketed surplus. A good
proportion of the rice and wheat
produced during the green revolution
period (available as marketed
surplus) was sold by the farmers in
the market. As a result, the price of
food grains declined relative to other
items of consumption. The lowincome groups, who spend a large
INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990

percentage of their income on food,
benefited from this decline in relative
prices. The green revolution enabled
the government to procure sufficient
amount of food grains to build a stock
which could be used in times of food
shortage.
While the nation had immensely
benefited from the green revolution, the
technology involved was not free from
risks. One such risk was the possibility
that it would increase the disparities
between small and big farmers—since
only the big farmers could afford the
required inputs, thereby reaping most
of the benefits of the green revolution.
Moreover, the HYV crops were also more
prone to attack by pests and the small
farmers who adopted this technology
could lose everything in a pest attack.
25

Fortunately, these fears did not
come true because of the steps taken
by the government. The government
provided loans at a low interest rate
to small farmers and subsidised
fertilisers so that small farmers could
also have access to the needed
inputs. Since the small farmers could
obtain the required inputs, the
output on small farms equalled the
output on large farms in the course
of time. As a result, the green
revolution benefited the small as well
as rich farmers. The risk of the small
farmers being ruined when pests
attack their crops was considerably
reduced by the services rendered by
research institutes established by the
government. You should note that
the green revolution would have
favoured the rich farmers only if the
state did not play an extensive role
in ensuring that the small farmer
also gains from the new technology.
The Debate Over Subsidies: The
economic justification of subsidies in
agriculture is, at present, a hotly
debated question. It is generally
agreed that it was necessary to use
subsidies to provide an incentive for
adoption of the new HYV technology
by farmers in general and small
far mers in particular. Any new
technology will be looked upon as
being risky by farmers. Subsidies
were, therefore, needed to encourage
farmers to test the new technology.
Some economists believe that once
the technology is found profitable
and is widely adopted, subsidies
26

should be phased out since their
purpose has been served. Further,
subsidies are meant to benefit the
farmers but a substantial amount of
fertiliser subsidy also benefits the
f e r t i l ise r i n d u s t r y ; a n d a m o n g
farmers, the subsidy largely benefits
the farmers in the more prosperous
regions. Therefore, it is argued that
there is no case for continuing with
fertiliser subsidies; it does not benefit
the target group and it is a huge
burden on the government’s finances
(see also Box 2.6).
On the other hand, some believe
that the government should continue
with agricultural subsidies because
farming in India continues to be a risky
business. Most farmers are very poor
and they will not be able to afford the
required inputs without subsidies.
Eliminating subsidies will increase the
inequality between rich and poor
farmers and violate the goal of equity.
These experts argue that if subsidies
are largely benefiting the fertiliser
industry and big farmers, the correct
policy is not to abolish subsidies but
to take steps to ensure that only the
poor farmers enjoy the benefits.
Thus, by the late 1960s, Indian
agricultural productivity had increased
sufficiently to enable the country to be
self-sufficient in food grains. This is an
achievement to be proud of. On the
negative side, some 65 per cent of the
country’s population continued to be
employed in agriculture even as late as
1990. Economists have found that as

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Box 2.6: Prices as Signals
You would have learnt in an earlier class about how prices of goods are
determined in the market. It is important to understand that prices are signals
about the availability of goods. If a good becomes scarce, its price will rise and
those who use this good will have the incentive to make efficient decisions
about its use based on the price. If the price of water goes up because of lower
supply, people will have the incentive to use it with greater care; for example,
they may stop watering the garden to conserve water. We complain whenever
the price of petrol increases and blame it on the government. But the increase
in petrol price reflects greater scarcity and the price rise is a signal that less
petrol is available— this provides an incentive to use less petrol or look for
alternate fuels.
Some economists point out that subsidies do not allow prices to indicate
the supply of a good. When electricity and water are provided at a subsidised
rate or free, they will be used wastefully without any concern for their scarcity.
Farmers will cultivate water intensive crops if water is supplied free, although
the water resources in that region may be scarce and such crops will further
deplete the already scarce resources. If water is priced to reflect scarcity,
farmers will cultivate crops suitable to the region. Fertiliser and pesticide
subsidies result in overuse of resources which can be harmful to the
environment. Subsidies provide an incentive for wasteful use of resources.
Think about subsidies in terms of incentives and ask yourself whether it is
wise from the economic viewpoint to provide free electricity to farmers.

a nation becomes more prosperous, the
proportion of GDP contributed by
agriculture as well as the proportion of
population working in the sector
declines considerably. In India,
between 1950 and 1990, the
proportion of GDP contributed by
agriculture declined significantly but
not the population depending on it
(67.5 per cent in 1950 to 64.9 per cent
by 1990). Why was such a large
proportion of the population engaged
in agriculture although agricultural
output could have grown with much
less people working in the sector? The
answer is that the industrial sector and
the service sector did not absorb the
people working in the agricultural
INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990

sector. Many economists call this an
important failure of our policies
followed during 1950-1990.

2.4 INDUSTRY AND TRADE
Economists have found that poor
nations can progress only if they have
a good industrial sector. Industry
provides employment which is more
stable than the employment in
agriculture; it promotes modernisation
and overall prosperity. It is for this
reason that the five year plans placed
a lot of emphasis on industrial
d e v e l o p m e n t . Yo u m i g h t h a v e
studied in the previous chapter that,
at the time of independence, the
variety of industries was very narrow
27

Work These Out

Ø A group of students may visit an agricultural farm, prepare a case study on
the method of farming used, that is, types of seeds, fertilisers, machines,
means of irrigation, cost involved, marketable surplus and income earned.
It will be beneficial if the changes in cultivation methods could be collected
from an elderly member of the farming family
(a) Discuss the findings in your class.
(b) The different groups can then prepare a chart showing variations in
cost of production, productivity, use of seeds, fertilisers, means of
irrigation, time taken, marketable surplus and income of the family.

Ø Collect newspaper cuttings related to the World Bank, International
Monetary Fund, World Trade Organisation (and meets of G7, G8, G10
countries). Discuss the views shared by the developed and developing
countries on farm subsidies.

Ø Prepare pie charts on the occupational structure of the Indian economy
available in the following table. Discuss the possible reasons for the change
in the shape of pies.
Sector
Agriculture
Industry
Services

1950–51
72.1
10.7
17.2

1990–91
66.8
12.7
20.5

Ø Study the arguments for and against agricultural subsidies. What is your
view on this issue?

Ø Some economists argue that farmers in other countries, particularly
developed countries, are provided with high amount of subsidies and are
encouraged to export their produce to other countries. Do you think our
farmers will be able to compete with farmers from developed countries?
Discuss.

— largely confined to cotton textiles
and jute. There were two wellmanaged iron and steel firms — one
in Jamshedpur and the other in
Kolkata — but, obviously, we needed
to expand the industrial base with a
variety of industries if the economy
was to grow.
28

Public and Private Sectors in Indian
Industrial Development: The big
question facing the policy makers was
— what should be the role of the
government and the private sector in
industrial development? At the time of
independence, Indian industrialists did
not have the capital to undertake
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

investment in industrial ventures
required for the development of Indian
economy; nor was the market big
enough to encourage industrialists to
undertake major projects even if they
had the capital to do so. It is principally
for these reasons that the erstwhile
governments had to play an extensive
role in promoting the industrial sector.
In addition, the decision to develop the
Indian economy on socialist lines led
to the policy of the government
controlling the commanding heights of
the economy, as the Second Five Year
plan put it. This meant that the
government would have complete
control of those industries that were
vital for the economy. The policies of the
private sector would have to be
complimentary to those of the public
sector, with the public sector leading
the way.
Industrial Policy Resolution 1956
(IPR 1956): In accordance with the
goal of the state controlling the
commanding heights of the economy,
the Industrial Policy Resolution of
1956 was adopted. This resolution
formed the basis of the Second Five
Year Plan, the plan which tried to
build the basis for a socialist pattern
of society. This resolution classified
industries into three categories. The
first category comprised industries
which would be exclusively owned by
the government; the second category
consisted of industries in which the
private sector could supplement the
efforts of the public sector, with the
government t a k i n g t h e s o l e
responsibility for starting new units;
the third category consisted of the
remaining industries which were to
be in the private sector.
INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990

Although there was a category of
industries left to the private sector,
the sector was kept under state
control through a system of licenses.
No new industry was allowed unless
a license was obtained from the
government. This policy was used for
promoting industry in backward
regions; it was easier to obtain a
license if the industrial unit was
established in an economically
backward area. In addition, such
units were given certain concessions
such as tax benefits and electricity
at a lower tariff. The purpose of this
policy was to promote regional
equality.
Even an existing industry had to
obtain a license for expanding
output or for diversifying production
(producing a new variety of goods).
This was meant to ensure that the
quantity of goods produced was not
more than what the economy
required. License to expand
production was given only if the
government was convinced that the
economy required a larger quantity
of goods.
Small-Scale Industry: In 1955, the
Village and Small-Scale Industries
Committee, also called the Karve
Committee, noted the possibility of
using small-scale industries for
promoting rural development. A
‘small-scale industry’ is defined with
reference to the maximum investment allowed on the assets of a unit.
This limit has changed over a period
o f t i m e . In 1950 a small -scale
industrial unit was one which invested
29

a maximum of rupees five lakh; at
present the maximum investment
allowed is rupees one crore.
It is believed that small-scale
industries are more ‘labour intensive’
i.e., they use more labour than the
large-scale industries and, therefore,
generate more employment. But these
industries cannot compete with the big
industrial firms; it is obvious that
development of small-scale industry
requires them to be shielded from the
large firms. For this purpose, the
production of a number of products
was reserved for the small-scale
industry; the criterion of reservation
being the ability of these units to
manufacture the goods. They were also
given concessions such as lower excise
duty and bank loans at lower interest
rates.

2.5 TRADE POLICY: IMPORT SUBSTITUTION

imported goods; they make imported
goods more expensive and discourage
their use. Quotas specify the quantity
of goods which can be imported. The
effect of tariffs and quotas is that they
restrict imports and, therefore, protect
the domestic firms from foreign
competition.
The policy of protection was based
on the notion that industries of
developing countries were not in a
position to compete against the
goods produced by more developed
economies. It was assumed that if the
domestic industries were protected
they would learn to compete in the
course of time. Our planners also
feared the possibility of foreign
exchange being spent on import of
luxury goods if no restrictions were
placed on imports. Nor was any
serious thought given to promote
exports until the mid-1980s.

T h e i n d u s t r i a l p o l i c y t h a t India
adopted was closely related to the
trade policy. In the first seven plans,
trade was characterised by what is
commonly called an inward looking
trade strategy. Technically, this
strategy is called import substitution. This policy aimed at replacing
or substituting imports with domestic
production. For example, instead of
importing vehicles made in a foreign
country, industries would be
encouraged to produce them in India
itself. In this policy the government
protected the domestic industries
from foreign competition. Protection
from imports took two forms: tariffs
and quotas. Tariffs are a tax on

Effect of Policies on Industrial
Development: The achievements of
India’s industrial sector during the
first seven plans are impressive
indeed. T h e p r o p o r t i o n o f G D P
contributed by the industrial
sector increased in the period from
13 per cent in 1950-51 to 24.6 per cent
i n 1 9 9 0 -9 1 . T h e r i s e i n t h e
industry’s share of GDP is an
important indicator of development.
The six per cent annual growth rate
of the industrial sector during the
period is commendable. No longer
was Indian industry restricted largely
to cotton textiles and jute; in fact, the
industrial sector became well
diversified by 1990, largely due to

30

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Work These Out

Ø Construct a pie chart for the following table on sectoral contribution to GDP
and discuss the difference in the contribution of the sectors in the light of
effects of development during 1950-91.
Sector

1950-51

1990-91

Agriculture

59.0

34.9

Industry

13.0

24.6

Services

28.0

40.5

Ø Conduct a debate in your classroom on the usefulness of Public Sector
Undertakings (PSUs) by dividing the class into two groups. One group may
speak in favour of PSUs and the other group against the motion (involve as
many students as possible and encourage them to give examples).

the public sector. The promotion
of s m a l l - s c a l e i n d u s t r i e s gave
opportunities to those people who did
not have the capital to start large
firms to get into business. Protection
from foreign competition enabled the
development of indigenous industries
in the areas of electronics and
automobile sectors which otherwise
could not have developed.
In spite of the contribution made
by the public sector to the growth of
the Indian economy, some economists
are critical of the performance of
many public sector enterprises. It was
proposed at the beginning of this
chapter that initially public sector
INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990

was required in a big way. It is now
widely held that state enterprises
continued to produce certain goods
and services (often monopolising
them) although this was no longer
required. An example is the provision
of telecommunication service. This
industry continued to be reserved for
the Public Sector even after it was
realised that private sector firms
could also provide it. Due to the
absence of competition, even till the
late 1990s, one had to wait for a long
time to get a telephone connection.
Another instance could be the
establishment of Modern Bread, a
bread-manufacturing firm, as if the
31

private sector could not manufacture
bread! In 2001 this firm was sold to
the private sector. The point is that
after four decades of Planned
development of Indian Economy no
distinction was made between (i) what
the public sector alone can do and
(ii) what the private sector can also
do. For example, even now only the
public sector supplies national
defense. And even though the private
sector can manage hotels well, yet,
the government also runs hotels. This
has led some scholars to argue that
the state should get out of areas
which the private sector can manage
and the government may concentrate
its resources on important services
which the private sector cannot
provide.
Many public sector firms incurred
huge losses but continued to
function because it is difficult to close
a government undertaking even if it
is a drain on the nation’s limited
resources. This does not mean that
private firms are always profitable
(indeed, quite a few of the public
sector firms were originally private
firms which were on the verge of
closure due to losses; they were then
nationalised to protect the jobs of the
workers). However, a loss-making
private firm will not waste resources
by being kept running despite the
losses.
The need to obtain a license to start
an industry was misused by
industrial houses; a big industrialist
would get a license not for starting a
new firm but to prevent competitors
from starting new firms. The excessive
32

regulation of what came to be called the
permit license raj prevented certain
firms from becoming more efficient.
More time was spent by industrialists
in trying to obtain a license or lobby
with the concerned ministries rather
than on thinking about how to improve
their products.
The protection from foreign
competition was also being criticised
on the ground that it continued even
after it proved to do more harm than
good. Due to restrictions on imports,
the Indian consumers had to
purchase whatever the Indian
producers produced. The producers
were aware that they had a captive
market; so they had no incentive to
improve the quality of their goods.
Why should they think of improving
quality when they could sell low
quality items at a high price?
Competition from imports forces our
producers to be more efficient.
A few economists also point out
that the public sector is not meant
for earning profits but to promote the
welfare of the nation. The public
sector firms, on this view, should be
evaluated on the basis of the extent
to which they contribute to the welfare
of people and not on the profits they
earn. Regarding protection, some
economists hold that we should
protect our producers from foreign
competition as long as the rich
nations continue to do so. Owing to
all these conflicts, economists called
for a change in our policy. This,
alongwith other problems, led the
government to introduce a new
economic policy in 1991.
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

2.6 CONCLUSION
The progress of the Indian economy
during the first seven plans was
impressive indeed. Our industries
became far more diversified compared
to the situation at independence. India
became self- suf ficient in food
production thanks to the green
revolution. Land reforms resulted in
abolition of the hated zamindari
system. In industrial sector, many
economists became dissatisfied with
the performance of many public sector
enterprises. Excessive government
regulation prevented growth of

entrepreneurship. In the name of selfreliance, Indian producers were
protected against foreign competition
and this did not give them the
incentive to improve the quality of
goods that they produced. Indian
policies were ‘inward oriented’ that
failed to develop a strong export
sector. The need for r e f o r m of
economic policy was widely felt in the
context of changing global economic
scenario, and the new economic policy
was initiated in 1991 to make
Indian economy more efficient. This is
the subject of the next chapter.

Recap

Ø After independence, India envisaged an economic system which combines
the best features of socialism and capitalism — this culminated in the mixed
economy model.

Ø All the economic planning has been formulated through five year plans.
Ø Common goals of five year plans are growth, modernisation, self-sufficiency
and equity.

Ø The major policy initiatives in agriculture sector were land reforms and
green revolution. These initiatives helped India to become self-sufficient in
food grains production.

Ø The proportion of people depending on agriculture did not decline as expected.
Ø Import substitution policy initiatives in the industrial sector raised its
contribution to GDP.

Ø One of the major drawbacks in the industrial sector was the inefficient
functioning of the public sector as it started incurring losses leading to
drain on the nation’s limited resources.

INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990

33

EXERCISES

34

1.

Define a plan.

2.

Why did India opt for planning?

3.

Why should plans have goals?

4.

What are High Yielding Variety (HYV) seeds?

5.

What is marketable surplus?

6.

Explain the need and type of land reforms implemented in the
agriculture sector.

7.

What is Green Revolution? Why was it implemented and how did
it benefit the farmers? Explain in brief.

8.

Explain ‘growth with equity’ as a planning objective.

9.

Does modernisation as a planning objective create contradiction
in the light of employment generation? Explain.

10.

Why was it necessary for a developing country like India to follow
self-reliance as a planning objective?

11.

What is sectoral composition of an economy? Is it necessary that
the service sector should contribute maximum to GDP of an
economy? Comment.

12.

Why was public sector given a leading role in industrial
development during the planning period?

13.

Explain the statement that green revolution enabled the
government to procure sufficient food grains to build its stocks
that could be used during times of shortage.

14.

While subsidies encourage farmers to use new technology, they are
a huge burden on government finances. Discuss the usefulness of
subsidies in the light of this fact.

15.

Why, despite the implementation of green revolution, 65 per cent
of India’s population continued to be engaged in the agriculture
sector till 1990?

16.

Though public sector is very essential for industries, many public
sector undertakings incur huge losses and are a drain on the
economy’s resources. Discuss the usefulness of public sector
undertakings in the light of this fact.
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

17.

Explain how import substitution can protect domestic industry.

18.

Why and how was private sector regulated under the IPR 1956?

19.

Match the following:

1. Prime Minister

A. Seeds that give large proportion of output

2. Gross Domestic

B. Quantity of goods that can be imported

Product
3. Quota

C. Chairperson of the planning commission

4. Land Reforms

D. The money value of all the final goods
and services produced within the economy
in one year

5. HYV Seeds

E. Improvements in the field of agriculture
to increase its productivity

6. Subsidy

F.

The monetary assistance given by
go v e r n m e n t f o r p r o d u c t i o n
activities.

REFERENCES

B HAGWATI , J. 1993. India in Transition: Freeing the Economy. Oxford
University Press, Delhi.
D ANDEKAR, V.M. 2004. Forty Years After Independence, in Bimal Jalan,
(Ed.). The Indian Economy: Problems and Prospects. Penguin, Delhi.
J OSHI, V IJAY. and I.M.D. LITTLE. 1996. India’s Economic Reforms 1991-2001.
Oxford University Press, Delhi.
M OHAN, RAKESH. 2004. Industrial Policy and Controls, in Bimal Jalan
(Ed.). The Indian Economy: Problems and Prospects. Penguin, Delhi.
R AO, C.H. HANUMANTHA. 2004. Agriculture: Policy and Performance, in Bimal
Jalan, (Ed.). The Indian Economy: Problems and Prospects. Penguin,
Delhi.

INDIAN ECONOMY 1950-1990

35

UNIT
UNIT

II
III

ECONOMIC REFORMS
SINCE 1991

After forty years of planned development, India
has been able to achieve a strong industrial base
and became self-sufficient in the production of food
grains. Nevertheless, a major segment of the
population continues to depend on agriculture for
its livelihood. In 1991, a crisis in the balance of
payments led to the introduction of economic
reforms in the country. This unit is an appraisal of
the reform process and its implications for India.

3

LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION
AND

GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL

After studying this chapter, the learners will
•
•
•
•

understand the background of the reform policies introduced in India
in 1991
understand the mechanism through which reform policies were
introduced
comprehend the process of globalisation and its implications for India
be aware of the impact of the reform process in various sectors.

There is a consensus in the world today that economic development is not all
and the GDP is not necessarily a measure of progress of a society.
K.R. Narayanan, Former President of India

3.1 I NTRODUCTION
You have studied in the previous
chapter that, since independence,
India followed the mixed economy
framework by combining the
advantages of the capitalist economic
system with those of the socialist
economic system. Some scholars argue
that, over the years, this policy resulted
in the establishment of a variety of
rules and laws, which were aimed at
controlling and regulating the
economy, ended up instead in
hampering the process of growth and
development. Others state that India,
which started its developmental path
from near stagnation, has since been
able to achieve growth in savings,
developed a diversified industrial
sector which produces a variety of
goods and has experienced sustained
expansion of agricultural output
which has ensured food security.
In 1991, India met with an
economic crisis relating to its external
debt — the government was not
able to make repayments on its
borrowings from abroad; foreign
exchange reserves, which we
generally maintain to import petroleum
and other important items, dropped
to levels that were not sufficient for
even a fortnight. The crisis was
further compounded by rising prices
of essential goods. All these led the
government to introduce a new set of

policy measures which changed the
direction of our developmental
strategies. In this chapter, we will
look at the background of the crisis,
measures that the government has
adopted and their impact on various
sectors of the economy.

3.2 BACKGROUND
The origin of the financial crisis can
be traced from the inefficient
management of the Indian economy
in the 1980s. We know that for
implementing various policies and
its general administration, the
government generates funds from
various sources such as taxation,
running of public sector enterprises
etc. When expenditure is more than
income, the government borrows to
finance the deficit from banks and
also from people within the country
and from international financial
institutions. When we import goods
like petroleum, we pay in dollars
which we earn from our exports.
Development policies required that
even though the revenues were
very low, the government had
to overshoot its revenue to meet
challenges like unemployment,
poverty and population explosion. The
continued spending on development
programmes of the government did not
generate additional revenue. Moreover,
the government was not able to

LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL

39

generate sufficiently from internal
sources such as taxation. When the
government was spending a large
share of its income on areas which do
not provide immediate returns such as
the social sector and defence, there was
a need to utilise the rest of its revenue
in a highly efficient manner. The
income
from
public
sector
undertakings was also not very high to
meet the growing expenditure. At
times, our f o r e i g n e x c h a n g e,
borrowed from other countries and
international financial institutions,
was spent on meeting consumption
needs. Neither was an attempt made to
reduce such profligate spending nor
sufficient attention was given to boost
exports to pay for the growing imports.
In the late 1980s, government
expenditure began to exceed its
revenue by such large margins that
meeting the expenditure through
borrowings became unsustainable.
Prices of many essential goods rose
sharply. Imports grew at a very high
rate without matching growth of
exports. As pointed out earlier, foreign
exchange reserves declined to a level
that was not adequate to finance
imports for more than two weeks.
There was also not sufficient foreign
exchange to pay the interest that
needed to be paid to international
lenders. Also no country or international
funder was willing to lend to India.
India approached the International
Bank for R e c o n s t r u c t i o n a n d
Development (IBRD), popularly
known as World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund (IMF),
40

and received $7 billion as loan to
manage the crisis. For availing the
loan, these international agencies
expected India to liberalise and open
up the economy by removing
restrictions on the private sector,
reduce the role of the government in
many areas and remove trade
restrictions between India and other
countries.
India agreed to the conditionalities
of World Bank and IMF and
announced the New Economic Policy
(NEP). The NEP consisted of wide
ranging economic reforms. The
thrust of the policies was towards
creating a more competitive
environment in the economy and
removing the barriers to entry and
growth of firms. This set of policies
can broadly be classified into two
groups: the stabilisation measures
and the structural reform measures.
Stabilisation measures are shortterm measures, intended to correct
some of the weaknesses that have
developed in the balance of
payments and to bring inflation
under control. In simple words, this
means that there was a need to
maintain sufficient foreign exchange
reserves and keep the rising prices
under control. On the other hand,
structural reform policies are long-term
measures, aimed at improving the
efficiency of the economy and increasing
its international competitiveness by
removing the rigidities in various
segments of the Indian economy. The
government initiated a variety of
policies which fall under three heads
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

viz., liberalisation, privatisation and
globalisation.

3.3 L IBERALISATION
As pointed out in the beginning,
rules and laws which were aimed at
regulating the economic activities
became major hindrances in growth
and development. Liberalisation was
introduced to put an end to these
restrictions and open various sectors
of the economy. Though a few
liberalisation measures were
introduced in 1980s in areas of
industrial licensing, export-import
policy, technology upgradation,
fiscal policy and foreign investment,
reform policies initiated in 1991 were
more comprehensive. Let us study
some important areas, such as the
industrial sector, financial sector, tax
reforms, foreign exchange markets
and trade and investment sectors
which received greater attention in
and after 1991.
Deregulation of Industrial Sector: In
India, regulatory mechanisms were
enforced in various ways (i) industrial
licensing under which every entrepreneur
had to get permission from government
officials to start a firm, close a firm
or decide the amount of goods
that could be produced (ii) private
sector was not allowed in many
industries (iii) some goods could be
produced only in small-scale industries,
and (iv) controls on price fixation and
distribution of selected industrial
products.

The reform policies introduced in
and after 1991 removed many of
these restrictions. Industrial
licensing was abolished for almost all
but product categories — alcohol,
cigarettes, hazardous chemicals,
industrial explosives, electronics,
aerospace and drugs and pharmaceuticals. The only industries which
are now reserved for the public sector
a r e a part of a t o m i c e n e r g y
generation and some core activities
in railway transport. Many goods
produced by small-scale industries
have now been dereserved. In most
industries, the market has been
allowed to determine the prices.
Financial Sector Reforms:
Financial sector includes financial
institutions, such as commercial
banks, investment banks, stock
exchange operations and foreign
exchange market. The financial
sector in India is regulated by the
Reserve Bank of India (RBI). You may
be aware that all banks and other
financial institutions in India are
regulated through various norms and
regulations of the RBI. The RBI
decides the amount of money that
the banks can keep with themselves,
fixes interest rates, nature of lending
to various sectors, etc. One of the
major aims of financial sector reforms
is to reduce the role of RBI from
regulator to facilitator of financial
sector. This means that the financial
sector may be allowed to take
decisions on many matters without
consulting the RBI.

LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL

41

The reform policies led to the
establishment of private sector banks,
Indian as well as foreign. Foreign
investment limit in banks was raised to
around 74 per cent. Those banks which
fulfil certain conditions have been given
freedom to set up new branches
without the approval of the RBI and
rationalise their existing branch
networks. Though banks have been
given permission to generate resources
from India and abroad, certain
managerial aspects have been retained
with the RBI to safeguard the interests
of the account-holders and the nation.
Foreign Institutional Investors (FII),
such as merchant bankers, mutual
funds and pension funds, are now
allowed to invest in Indian financial
markets.
Tax Reforms: Tax reforms are
concerned with the reforms in the
government’s taxation and public
expenditure policies, which are
collectively known as its fiscal policy.
There are two types of taxes: direct and
indirect. Direct taxes consist of taxes
on incomes of individuals, as well as,
profits of business enterprises. Since
1991, there has been a continuous
reduction in the taxes on individual
incomes as it was felt that high rates of
income tax were an important reason
for tax evasion. It is now widely
accepted that moderate rates of income
tax encourage savings and voluntary
disclosure of income. The rate of
corporation tax, which was very high
earlier, has been gradually reduced.
Efforts have also been made to reform
the indirect taxes, taxes levied on
commodities, in order to facilitate the
42

establishment of a common national
market for goods and commodities.
In 2016, the Indian Parliament
passed a law, Goods and Services Tax
Act 2016, to simplify and introduce a
unified indirect tax system in India.
This law came into effect from July
2017. This is expected to generate
additional revenue for the government,
reduce tax evasion and create ‘one
nation, one tax and one market’.
Another component of reform in this
area is simplification. In order to
encourage better compliance on the
part of taxpayers, many procedures
have been simplified and the rates also
substantially lowered.
Foreign Exchange Reforms: The first
important reform in the external sector
was made in the foreign exchange
market. In 1991, as an immediate
measure to resolve the balance of
payments crisis, the rupee was
devalued against foreign currencies.
This led to an increase in the inflow of
foreign exchange. It also set the tone to
free the determination of rupee value
in the foreign exchange market from
government control. Now, more often
than not, markets determine exchange
rates based on the demand and supply
of foreign exchange.
Trade and Investment Policy
Reforms: Liberalisation of trade and
investment regime was initiated to
increase international competitiveness of
industrial production and also foreign
investments and technology into the
economy. The aim was also to promote
the efficiency of local industries and
adoption of modern technologies.
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

In order to protect domestic
industries, India was following a regime
of quantitative restrictions on
imports. This was encouraged through
tight control over imports and by
keeping the tariffs very high. These
policies reduced efficiency and
competitiveness which led to slow
growth of the manufacturing sector.
The trade policy reforms aimed at (i)
dismantling of quantitative restrictions
on imports and exports (ii) reduction

of tariff rates and (iii) removal of
licensing procedures for imports.
Import licensing was abolished except
in
case
of
hazardous
and
environmentally sensitive industries.
Quantitative restrictions on imports of
manufactured consumer goods and
agricultural products were also fully
removed from April 2001. Export
duties have been removed to increase
the competitive position of Indian goods
in the international markets.

Work These Out
Ø Give an example each of nationalised bank, private bank, private foreign
bank, FII and a mutual fund.
Ø Visit a bank in your locality with your parents. Observe and find out the
functions it performs. Discuss the same with your classmates and prepare
a chart on it.
Ø Find out from your parents if they pay taxes. If yes, why do they do so and
how?
Ø Do you know that for a very long time countries used to keep silver and gold
as reserves to make payments abroad? Find out in what form do we keep
our foreign exchange reserves and find out from newspapers, magazines
and the Economic Survey how much foreign exchange reserves India had
during the last year. Also find the foreign currency of the following countries
and its latest rupee exchange rate.
Country

Currency

Value of 1(one) unit of foreign
currency in Indian rupee

U.S.A.
U.K.
Japan
China
Korea
Singapore
Germany

LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL

43

3.4 PRIVATISATION
It implies shedding of the ownership
or management of a government
o w n e d e n t e r p r i s e. G o v e r n m e n t
companies are converted into private
c o m p a n i e s i n t w o w a y s ( i) b y
withdrawal of the government from
ownership and management of
public sector companies and or (ii) by
outright sale of public sector
companies.

Privatisation of the public sector
enterprises by selling off part of the
equity of PSEs to the public is known
as disinvestment. The purpose of the
sale, according to the government,
was mainly to improve financial
discipline and facilitate modernisation.
It was also envisaged that private
capital and managerial capabilities
could be effectively utilised to
improve the performance of the PSUs.

Box 3.1: Navratnas and Public Enterprise Policies
You must have read in your childhood about the famous Navratnas or Nine
Jewels in the Imperial Court of King Vikramaditya who were eminent persons
of excellence in the fields of art, literature and knowledge. In order to improve
efficiency, infuse professionalism and enable them to compete more effectively
in the liberalised global environment, the government identifies PSEs and
declare them as maharatnas, navratnas and miniratnas. They were given greater
managerial and operational autonomy, in taking various decisions to run the
company efficiently and thus increase their profits. Greater operational,
financial and managerial autonomy has also been granted to profit-making
enterprises referred to as miniratnas.
The Central Public Sector Enterprises are designated with different status.
A few examples of public enterprises with their status are as follows:
(i) Maharatnas – (a) Indian Oil Corporation Limited, and (b) Steel Authority of
India Limited, (ii) Navratnas – (a) Hindustan Aeronautics Limited,
(b) Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited; and (iii) Miniratnas – (a) Bharat
Sanchar Nigam Limited; (b) Airport Authority of India and (c) Indian Railway
Catering and Tourism Corporation Limited.
Many of these profitable PSEs were originally formed during the 1950s
and 1960s when self-reliance was an important element of public policy. They
were set up with the intention of providing infrastructure and direct employment
to the public so that quality end-product reaches the masses at a nominal
cost and the companies themselves were made accountable to all stakeholders.
The granting of status resulted in better performance of these companies.
Scholars allege that instead of facilitating public enterprises in their expansion
and enabling them to become global players, the government partly privatised
them through disinvesment. Of late, the government has decided to retain
them in the public sector and enable them to expand themselves in the global
markets and raise resources by themselves from financial markets.

44

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Work These Out
Ø Some scholars refer to disinvestment as the wave of privatisation spreading
all over the world to improve the performance of public sector enterprises
whereas others call it as outright sale of public property to the vested
interests. What do you think?
Ø Prepare a poster which contains 10-15 news clippings which you consider
as important and relating to navaratnas from newspapers. Also collect the
logos and advertisements of these PSEs. Put these on the notice board and
discuss them in the classroom.
Ø Do you think only loss making companies should be privatised? Why?
Ø Losses incurred by public sector enterprises are to be met out of the public
budget. Do you agree with this statement? Discuss.

The government envisaged that
privatisation could provide strong
impetus to the inflow of FDI.
The government has also made
attempts to improve the efficiency of
PSUs by giving them autonomy
in taking managerial decisions. For
instance, some PSUs have been
granted special status as maharatnas,
navratnas and miniratnas (see
Box 3.1).

3.5 GLOBALISATION
Although globalisation is generally
understood to mean integration of the
economy of the country with the world
economy, it is a complex phenomenon.
It is an outcome of the set of various
policies that are aimed at transforming
the
world
towards
greater
interdependence and integration. It
involves creation of networks and
activities transcending economic, social
and geographical boundaries.
Globalisation attempts to establish

links in such a way that the
happenings in India can be influenced
by events happening miles away. It is
turning the world into one whole or
creating a borderless world.
Outsourcing: This is one of the
important outcomes of the
globalisation process. In outsourcing,
a company hires regular service from
external sources, mostly from other
countries, which was previously
provided internally or from within the
country (like legal advice, computer
service, advertisement, security —
each provided by respective
departments of the company). As a
form of economic activity, outsourcing
has intensified, in recent times,
because of the growth of fast modes
of communication, particularly the
growth of Information Technology
(IT). Many of the services such as
voice-based business processes
(popularly known as BPO or
call centres), record keeping,

LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL

45

Box 3.2: Global Footprint!
Owing to globalisation, you might find many Indian companies have expanded
their wings to many other countries. For example, ONGC Videsh, a subsidiary of
the Indian public sector enterprise, Oil and Natural Gas Corporation engaged in
oil and gas exploration and production has projects in 16 countries. Tata Steel, a
private company established in 1907, is one of the top ten global steel companies
in the world which have operations in 26 countries and sell its products in 50
countries. It employs nearly 50,000 persons in other countries. HCL Technologies,
one of the top five IT companies in India has offices in 31 countries and employs
about 15,000 persons abroad. Dr Reddy's Laboratories, initially was a small
company supplying pharmaceutical goods to big Indian companies, today has
manufacturing plants and research centres across the world.
Source: www.rediff.com accessed on 14.10.2014.

accountancy, banking services, music
recording, film editing, book
transcription, clinical advice or even
teaching are being outsourced by
companies in developed countries to
India. With the help of modern
telecommunication links including the
Internet, the text, voice and visual data
in respect of these services is digitised
and transmitted in real time over
continents and national boundaries.
Most multinational corporations, and
even small companies, are outsourcing
their services to India where they can

be availed at a cheaper cost with
reasonable degree of skill and
accuracy. The low wage rates and
availability of skilled manpower in
India have made it a destination for
global outsourcing in the post-reform
period.

World Trade Organisation (WTO):
The WTO was founded in 1995 as
the successor organisation to the
General Agreement on Trade and
Tariff (GATT). GATT was established
in 1948 with 23 countries as the
global trade organisation
to
administer
all
multilateral
trade
agreements by providing
equal opportunities to
all countries in the
international market for
trading purposes. WTO is
expected to establish a
rule-based trading regime
in which nations cannot
place arbitrary restrictions
on trade. In addition, its
purpose is also to enlarge
Fig. 3.1 Outsourcing: a new employment opportunity in big cities

46

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Work These Out
Ø Many scholars argue that globalisation is a threat as it reduces the role of
the government in many sectors. Some counter argue that it is an
opportunity as it opens up markets to compete in and capture. Debate in
the classroom.
Ø Prepare a chart consisting of a list of five companies that have BPO services
in India, along with their turnover.
Ø Did you attend online classes or watched videos of your teachers or any
other teacher taking classes during the last year through television, mobile
phone or computers due to Covid 19 Pandemic? Share your experiences
related to information technology.
Ø Is employment in call centres sustainable? What kinds of skills should people
working in call centres acquire to get a regular income?
Ø If the multinational companies outsource many services to countries like
India because of cheap manpower, what will happen to people living in the
countries where the companies are located? Discuss.

production and trade of services, to
ensure optimum utilisation of world
resources
and to protect the
environment. The WTO agreements
cover trade in goods as well as services
to facilitate international trade
(bilateral and multilateral) through
removal of tariff as well as non-tariff
barriers and providing greater market
access to all member countries.

As an important member of
WTO, India has been in the forefront
of framing fair global rules,
regulations and safeguards and
advocating the interests of the
developing world. India has kept its
commitments towards liberalisation
of trade, made in the WTO, by
removing quantitative restrictions on
imports and reducing tariff rates.

TABLE 3.1
Growth of GDP and Major Sectors (in %)
Sector
Agriculture
Industry
Services
Total

1980-91

1992-2001

2002-07

2007-12

2012-13

2013-14

2014-15

3.6
7.1
6.7
5.6

3.3
6.5
8.2
6.4

2.3
9.4
7.8
7.8

3.2
7.4
10
8.2

1.5
3.6
8.1
5.6

4.2
5
7.8
6.6

– 0.2*
7.0*
9.8*
7.4

Source: Economic Survey for various years, Ministry of Finance, Government of India.
Note: *Data pertaining to Gross Value Added (GVA). The GVA is estimated from GDP by adding
subsidies on production and subtracting indirect taxes.
LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL

47

Some scholars question the
usefulness of India being a member of
the WTO as a major volume of
international trade occurs among the
developed nations. They also say that
while developed countries file
complaints over agricultural subsidies
given in their countries, developing
countries feel cheated as they are forced
to open their markets for developed
countries but are not allowed access to
the markets of developed countries.
What do you think?

Fig. 3.2 IT industry is seen as a major contributor
to India’s exports

3.6 INDIAN ECONOMY DURING
R EFORMS: AN ASSESSMENT
The reform process has completed
three decades since its introduction.
Let us now look at the performance
of the Indian economy during this
period. In economics, the growth of
an economy is measured by the Gross
Domestic Product. Look at Table 3.1.
The post–1991 India witnessed a
rapid growth in GDP on a continual
basis for two decades. The growth
of GDP increased from 5.6 per cent
during 1980–91 to 8.2 per cent
during 2007–12. During the reform
48

period, the growth of agriculture has
declined. While the industrial sector
reported fluctuation, the growth of the
service sector has gone up. This
indicates that GDP growth is mainly
driven by growth in the service sector.
During 2012-15, there has been a
setback in the growth rates of different
sectors witnessed post–1991. While
agriculture recorded a high growth rate
during 2013–14, this sector witnessed
negative growth in the subsequent
year. While the service sector
continued to witness a high level of
growth — higher than the overall GDP
growth in 2014–15, this sector
witnessed the high growth rate of 9.8
per cent. The industrial sector
witnessed a steep decline during 2012–
13, in the subsequent years it began
to show a continuous positive growth.
The opening of the economy has
led to a rapid increase in foreign direct
investment and foreign exchange
reserves. The foreign investment,
which includes foreign direct
investment (FDI) and foreign
institutional investment (FII), has
increased from about US $100 million
in 1990-91 to US $ 30 billion in
2017-18. There has been an increase
in the foreign exchange reserves from
about US $ 6 billion in 1990-91 to
about US $ 413 billion in 2018-19.
India is one of the largest foreign
exchange reserve holders in the world.
Since 1991, India is seen as a
successful exporter of auto parts,
pharmaceutical goods engineering
goods, IT software and textiles. Rising
prices have also been kept under
control.
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Work These Out

Ø In the previous chapter, you might have studied about subsidies in various
sectors, including agriculture. Some scholars argue that subsidy in agriculture
should be removed to make the sector internationally competitive. Do you
agree? If so, how can it be done? Discuss in class.
Ø Read the following passage and discuss in class.
Groundnut is a major oilseed crop in Andhra Pradesh. Mahadeva,
who was a farmer in Anantpur district of Andhra Pradesh, used to spend
Rs. 10,000 for growing groundnut on his plot of half an acre. The cost
included expenditure on raw material (seeds, fertilisers, etc.), labour,
bullock power and machinery used. On an average, Mahadeva used to get
two quintals of groundnut, and each quintal was sold for Rs. 7,000.
Mahadeva, thus, was spending Rs. 10,000 and getting an income of Rs.
14,000. Anantpur district is a drought-prone area. As a result of economic
reforms, the government did not undertake any major irrigation project.
Recently, groundnut crop in Anantpur is facing problems due to crop
disease. Research and extension work has gone down due to lower
government expenditure. Mahadeva and his friends brought this matter
repeatedly to the notice of the government officials entrusted with this
responsibility, but failed. Subsidy was reduced on material (seeds,
fertilisers) which increased Mahadeva’s cost of cultivation. Moreover, the
local markets were flooded with cheap imported edible oils, which was a
result of removal of restriction on imports. Mahadeva was not able to sell
his groundnut in the market as he was not getting the price to cover
his cost.
What could be done to farmers like Mahadeva from incurring losses?
Discuss in the class.

On the other hand, the reform
process has been widely criticised
for not being able to address some
of the basic problems facing our
economy especially in areas of
employment, agriculture, industry,
infrastructure development and fiscal
management.

Growth and Employment: Though
the GDP growth rate has increased in
the reform period, scholars point out
that the reform-led growth has not
generated sufficient employment
opportunities in the country. You will
study the link between different aspects
of employment and growth in the
next unit.

LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL

49

Reforms in Agriculture: Reforms
have not been able to benefit
agriculture, where the growth rate has
been decelerating.
Since 1991, public investment in
agriculture sector especially in
infrastructure, which includes
irrigation, power, roads, market
linkages and research and extension
(which played a crucial role in the
Green Revolution), has fallen. Further,
the partial removal of fertiliser subsidy
has led to increase in the cost of
production, which has severely
affected the small and marginal
farmers. This sector has been
experiencing a number of policy
changes such as reduction in import
duties on agricultural products, low
minimum support price and lifting of
quantitative restrictions on the imports
of agricultural products. These have
adversely affected Indian farmers as
they now have to face increased
international competition.
Moreover, because of exportoriented policy strategies in agriculture,
there has been a shift from production
for the domestic market towards
production for the export market
focusing on cash crops in lieu of
production of food grains. This puts
pressure on prices of food grains.
Reforms in Industry: Industrial
growth has also recorded a slowdown.
This is because of decreasing demand
of industrial products due to
various reasons such as cheaper
imports, inadequate investment in
50

infrastructure etc. In a globalised
world, developing countries are
compelled to open up their economies
to greater flow of goods and capital
from developed countries and
rendering their industries vulnerable
to imported goods. Cheaper imports
have, thus, replaced the demand
for domestic goods. Domestic
manufacturers are facing competition
from imports. The infrastructure
facilities, including power supply,
have remained inadequate due to lack
of investment. Globalisation is, thus,
often seen as creating conditions for
the free movement of goods and
services from foreign countries that
adversely affect the local industries
and employment opportunities in
developing countries.
Moreover, a developing country
like India still does not have the access
to developed countries’ markets
because of high non-tariff barriers. For
example, although all quota
restrictions on exports of textiles and
clothing have been removed in India,
USA has not removed their quota
restriction on import of textiles from
India and China.
Disinvestment: Every year, the
government fixes a target for
disinvestment of PSEs. For instance,
in 1991-92, it was targeted to mobilise
Rs 2500 crore through disinvestment.
The government was able to mobilise
` 3,040 crore more than the target.
In 2017–18, the target was about
` 1,00,000 crore, and the achievement
was about ` 1,00,057 crore. Critics

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

point out that the assets of PSEs have
been undervalued and sold to the
private sector. This means that there
has been a substantial loss to the
government and the outright sale of
public assets! Moreover, the proceeds
from disinvestment are used to offset
the shortage of government revenues
rather than using it for
the
development of PSEs and building
social infrastructure in the country.
Do you think selling a part of the
properties of government companies
is the best way to improve their
efficiency?
Reforms and Fiscal Policies:
Economic reforms have placed limits
on the growth of public expenditure,
especially in social sectors. The tax
reductions in the reform period, aimed
at yielding larger revenue and curb tax
evasion, have not resulted in increase
in tax revenue for the government. Also,

the reform policies, involving tariff
reduction, have curtailed the scope for
raising revenue through custom duties.
In order to attract foreign investment,
tax incentives are provided to foreign
investors which further reduced the
scope for raising tax revenues. This has
a negative impact on developmental and
welfare expenditures.

3.7 CONCLUSION
The process of globalisation through
liberalisation and privatisation policies
has produced positive, as well as,
negative results both for India and
other countries. Some scholars argue
that globalisation should be seen as
an opportunity in terms of greater
access to global markets, high
technology and increased possibility of
large industries of developing
countries to become important
players in the international arena.

Box 3.3: Siricilla Tragedy!
Power sector reforms in many Indian states led to do away with the supply of
electricity at subsidised rates and steep rise in power tariff. This has affected
workers engaged in small industries. Powerloom textile industry in Andhra
Pradesh is an example. Since the wages of the powerloom workers are linked
to the production of cloth, power cut means cut in wages of weavers, who
were already suffering from hike in tariff. A few years ago, this led to a crisis
in the livelihood of the weavers and 50 powerloom workers committed suicide
in a small town called ‘Siricilla’ in Andhra Pradesh.
Ø
Ø

Do you think the power tariff should not be raised?
What would be your suggestions to revive small industries affected by
reforms?

LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL

51

On the contrary, the critics argue
that globalisation is a strategy of the
developed countries to expand their
markets in other countries. According
to them, it has compromised the
welfare and identity of people
belonging to poor countries. It has
further been pointed out that marketdriven globalisation has widened the
economic disparities among nations
and people.
Viewed from the Indian context,
some studies have stated that the
crisis that erupted in the early 1990s
was basically an outcome of the deeprooted inequalities in Indian society
and the economic reform policies

initiated as a response to the crisis
by the government, with externally
advised policy package, further
aggravated the inequalities. Further,
it has increased the income and
quality of consumption of only highincome groups and the growth has
been
concentrated
only
in
some select areas in the services sector
such
as
telecommunication,
information technology, finance,
entertainment, travel and hospitality
services, real estate and trade,
rather than vital sectors such as
agriculture and industry which
provide livelihoods to millions of
people in the country.

Recap
Ø The economy was facing problems of declining foreign exchange, growing
imports without matching rise in exports and high inflation. India changed
its economic policies in 1991 due to a financial crisis and pressure from
international organisations like the World Bank and IMF.
Ø In the domestic economy, major reforms were undertaken in the industrial
and financial sectors. Major external sector reforms included foreign
exchange deregulations and import liberalisation.
Ø With a view to improving the performance of the public sector, there was a
consensus on reducing its role and opening it up to the private sector. This
was done through disinvestment and liberalisation measures.
Ø Globalisation is the outcome of the policies of liberalisation and privatisation.
It means an integration of the economy of the country with the world economy.
Ø Outsourcing is emerging as a major activity in industrial and service
sectors.
Ø The objective of the WTO is to establish a rule based trade regime to ensure
optimum utilisation of world resources.
Ø During the reforms, growth of agriculture and industry has gone down but
the service sector has registered growth.
Ø Reforms have not benefited the agriculture sector. There has also been a
decline in public investment in this sector.
Ø Industrial sector growth has slowed down due to availability of cheaper
imports and lower investment.

52

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

EXERCISES

1.

Why were reforms introduced in India?

2.

Why is it necessary to became a member of WTO?

3.

Why did RBI have to change its role from controller to facilitator of
financial sector in India?

4.

How is RBI controlling the commercial banks?

5.

What do you understand by devaluation of rupee?

6.

Distinguish between the following
(i) Strategic and Minority sale
(ii) Bilateral and Multi-lateral trade
(iii) Tariff and Non-tariff barriers.

7.

Why are tariffs imposed?

8.

What is the meaning of quantitative restrictions?

9.

Those public sector undertakings which are making profits
should be privatised. Do you agree with this view? Why?

10.

Do you think outsourcing is good for India? Why are developed
countries opposing it?

11.

India has certain advantages which makes it a favourite outsourcing
destination. What are these advantages?

12.

Do you think the navaratna policy of the government helps in
improving the performance of public sector undertakings in India?
How?

13.

What are the major factors responsible for the high growth of the
service sector?

14.

Agriculture sector appears to be adversely affected by the reform
process. Why?

15.

Why has the industrial sector performed poorly in the reform
period?

16.

Discuss economic reforms in India in the light of social justice
and welfare.

LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL

53

SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES
1.

2.

3.

54

The table given below shows the GDP growth rate at 2004-05
prices. You have studied about the techniques of presentation
of data in your Statistics for Economics course. Draw a time
series line graph based on the data given in the table and interpret the same.

Year

GDP Growth Rate (%)

2005-06

9.5

2006-07

9.6

2007-08

9.3

2008-09

6.7

2009-10

8.6

2010-11

8.9

2011-12

6.7

2012-13

5.4

2013-14

6.4

2014-15

7.4

Observe around you — you will find State Electricity Boards
(SEBs), BSES and many public and private organisations supplying electricity in different states and union territories. There are
private buses on roads alongside the goverment bus services and
so on.

(i)

What do you think about this dual system of the co-existence
of public and private sectors?

(ii)

What are the merits and demerits of such a dual system?
Discuss.

With the help of your parents and grandparents prepare a list of
multinational companies that existed in India at the time of
independence. Now put a (ü ) mark against those which are still
growing and a (× ) against those which do not exist any more. Are
there any companies whose names have changed? Find out the
new names, the country of origin, nature of product, logo and
prepare charts and display in your class.

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

4.

Give appropriate examples for the following:
Nature of Product
Biscuits
Shoes
Computers
Cars
TV and Refrigerators
Stationery

Name of a Foreign Company

Now, find out if these companies which are mentioned above existed in
India before 1991, or came after the New Economic Policy. For this, take
the help of your teacher, parents, grandparents and shopkeepers.
5.

Collect a few relevant newspaper cuttings and from the internet
on meetings organised by WTO. Discuss the issues debated in
these meetings, and find out how WTO facilitates world trade.

6.

Was it necessary for India to introduce economic reforms at the
behest of World Bank and International Monetary Fund? Was there
no alternative for the government to solve the balance of payments crisis? Discuss in the classroom.

REFERENCES

Books
ACHARYA, S. 2003. India’s Economy: Some Issues and Answers. Academic
Foundation, New Delhi.
ALTERNATIVE SURVEY GROUP. 2005. Alternative Economic Survey, India 2004–05,
Disequalising Growth. Daanish Books, Delhi.
AHLUWALIA , I.J. and I.M.D. L ITTLE . 1998. India’s Economic Reforms and
Development. Oxford University Press, New Delhi.
BARDHAN , PRANAB. 1998. The Political Economy of Development in India.
Oxford University Press, Delhi.
BHADURI, AMIT and D EEPAK N AYYAR . 1996. The Intelligent Person’s Guide to
Liberalisation. Penguin, Delhi.
BHAGWATI, J AGDISH. 1992. India in Transition: Freeing the Economy. Oxford
University Press, Delhi.
LIBERALISATION, PRIVATISATION AND GLOBALISATION: AN APPRAISAL

55

BYRES, TERENCE J. 1997. The State, Development Planning and
Liberalisation in India. Oxford University Press, Delhi.
C HADHA, G.K. 1994. Policy Perspectives in Indian Economic Development.
Har -Anand, Delhi.
C HELLIAH, R AJA J. 1996. Towards Sustainable Growth: Essays in Fiscal
and Financial Sector Reforms in India. Oxford University Press, New
Delhi.
D EBROY , B. and R AHUL M UKHERJI (Eds.). 2004. The Political Economy of
Reforms. Bookwell Publication, New Delhi.
D REZE , J EAN and AMARTYA S EN. 1996. India: Economic Development and
Social Opportunity. Oxford University Press, New Delhi.
D UTT, RUDDAR AND K.P.M. SUNDARAM. 2005. Indian Economy. S. Chand and
Company, New Delhi.
G UHA , A SHOK (Ed.) 1990. Economic Liberalisation, Industrial Structure
and Growth in India. Oxford University Press, New Delhi.
J ALAN , B IMAL . 1993. India’s Economic Crisis: The Way Ahead. Oxford
University Press, New Delhi.
J ALAN , B IMAL . 1996. India’s Economic Policy: Preparing for the Twenty
First Century. Viking, Delhi.
J OSHI , V IJAY and I.M.D. L ITTLE. 1996. India’s Economic Reforms 1991-2001.
Oxford University Press, New Delhi,
K APILA, Uma. 2020. Indian Economy: Performences and Policies. Academic
Foundation, New Delhi.
M AHAJAN, V.S. 1994. Indian Economy Towards 2000 A.D. Deep & Deep,
Delhi.
P AREKH , KIRIT and RADHAKRISHNA , 2002, India Development Report 2001-02.
Oxford University Press, New Delhi.
R AO, C.H. HANUMANTHA. and H ANS LINNEMANN. 1996. Economic Reforms and
Poverty Alleviation in India, Sage Publication, Delhi.
S ACHS, J EFFREY D., ASHUTOSH V ARSHNEY and N IRUPAM B AJPAI.1999. India in
the Era of Economic Reforms. Oxford University Press, New Delhi.
Government Reports and Websites
Economic Survey for various years. Ministry of Finance, Government of
India. Published by Oxford University Press, New Delhi.
Tenth Five Year Plan 1997-2002. Vol. 1. Government of India, Planning
Commission, New Delhi.
Appraisal Document of Twelfth Five Year Plan 2012-2017, NITI Aayog,
Government of India.
https://dipam.gov.in
Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy, Reserve Bank of India for various
years, Mumbai.
56

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

UNIT
UNIT

III
CURRENT CHALLENGES FACING THE
INDIAN ECONOMY

4

HUMAN CAPITAL
FORMATION IN INDIA

After studying this chapter, the learners will understand
•
•
•
•

the concepts of Human Resource, Human Capital Formation and Human
Development
the links between investment in human capital, economic growth and
human development
the need for government spending on education and health
the state of India’s educational attainment.

“... the wisdom of expending public and private funds on education is not to be
measured by its direct fruits alone. It will be profitable as a mere investment,
to give the masses of people much greater opportunities than they can generally
avail themselves of. For by this means many, who would have died unknown,
are enabled to get the start needed for bringing out their latent abilities”.
Alfred Marshall

4.1 INTRODUCTION
Think of one factor that has made a
great difference in the evolution of
mankind. Perhaps it is human
capacity to store and transmit
knowledge which they have been doing
through conversation, through songs
and through elaborate lectures. But
humans soon found out that we need
a good deal of training and skill to do
things efficiently. We know that the
labour skill of an educated person is
more than that of an uneducated
person and hence the former is able

to generate more income than the latter
and his or her contribution to economic
growth is, consequently, more.
Education is sought not only as it
confers higher earning capacity on
people but also for its other highly
valued benefits: it gives one a better
social standing and pride; it enables
one to make better choices in life; it
provides knowledge to understand the
changes taking place in society; it also
stimulates innovations. Moreover,
the availability of educated labour
force facilitates adaptation of new

Fig. 4.1 Adequate education and training to farmers can raise productivity in farms

HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA

59

technologies. Economists have stressed
the need for expanding educational
opportunities in a nation as it
accelerates the development process.

4.2 WHAT IS HUMAN CAPITAL?
Just as a country can turn physical
resources like land into physical
capital like factories, similarly, it can
also turn human resources like
nurses, farmers, teachers, students
into human capital like engineers and
doctors. Societies need sufficient
human capital in the first place — in
the form of competent people who have
themselves been educated and trained
as professors and other professionals.
In other words, we need good human
capital to produce other human capital
(say, nurses, farmers, teachers,
doctors, engineers...). This means that
we need investment in human capital
to produce more human capital out of
human resources.
Let us understand a little more of
what human capital means by posing
the following questions :
(i) What are the sources of human
capital?
(ii) Is there any relation between
human capital and economic
growth of a country?
(iii) Is the formation of human
capital linked to people’s all-round
development or, as it is now called,
human development?
(iv) What role can the government
play in human capital formation
in India?
60

4.3 SOURCES OF HUMAN CAPITAL
Investment in education is considered
as one of the main sources of human
capital. There are several other sources
as well. Investments in health, on- thejob training, migration and information
are the other sources of human capital
formation.
Why do your parents spend
money on education? Spending on
Work This Out

Ø Identify and collect the data
from three families from
different strata (i) very poor
(ii) middle class and (iii)
af fluent.
Study
the
expenditure pattern of the
families on education of
male and female children.

education by individuals is similar to
spending on capital goods by
companies with the objective of
increasing future profits over a period
of time. Likewise, individuals invest
in education with the objective of
increasing their future income.
Like education, health is also
considered as an important input for
the development of a nation as much
as it is important for the development
of an individual.
Who can work better — a sick
person or a person with sound health?
A sick labourer without access to
medical facilities is compelled to
abstain from work and there is loss of
productivity. Hence, expenditure on
health is an important source of
human capital formation.
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

The amount of money
spent on preventive
medicine (vaccination),
curative medicine
(medical intervention
during illness), social
medi-cine (spread of
health literacy) and
provision of clean
drinking water and good sanitation
are the various forms of health
expenditures. Health expenditure
directly increases the supply of healthy
labour force and is, thus, a source of
human capital
formation.
Firms spend on
giving on-thejob-training to
their workers.
This may take
different forms:
one, the workers may be trained in the
firm itself under the supervision of a
skilled worker; two, the workers may
be sent for off-campus training. In both
these cases firms incur some expenses.
Firms will, thus, insist that the workers
should work for a specific period of
time, after their on-the-job training,
during which it can recover the benefits
of the enhanced productivity owing to
the training. Expenditure regarding onthe-job training is a source of human
capital formation as the return of such
expenditure in the form of enhanced
labour productivity is more than the
cost of it.
People migrate in search of jobs
that fetch them higher salaries than
what they may get in their native
HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA

places. Unemployment is the reason for
the rural-urban migration in India.
Technically qualified persons, like
engineers and doctors, migrate to other
countries because of higher salaries
that they may get in such countries.
Migration in both these cases involves
cost of transport, higher cost of living
in the migrated places and psychic
costs of living in a strange sociocultural setup. The enhanced earnings
in the new place outweigh the costs of
migration; hence, expenditure on
migration is also a source of human
capital formation.
People
spend
to
acquire
information relating to the labour
market and other markets like
education and health. For example,
people want to know the level of salaries
associated with various types of jobs,
whether the educational institutions
provide the right type of employable
skills and at what cost. This information
is necessary to make decisions
regarding investments in human capital
as well as for efficient utilisation of the
acquired human capital stock.
Expenditure incurred for acquiring
information relating to the labour
market and other markets is also a
source of human capital formation.
61

Box 4.1: Physical and Human Capital
Both the forms of capital formation are outcomes of conscious investment decisions.
Decision regarding investment in physical capital is taken on the basis of one’s knowledge
in this regard. The entrepreneur possesses knowledge to calculate the expected rates of
return to a range of investments and then rationally decides which one of the
investments should be made. The ownership of physical capital is the outcome of the
conscious decision of the owner — the physical capital formation is mainly an economic
and technical process. A substantial part of the human capital formation takes place
in one’s life when she/he is unable to decide whether it would maximise her/his earnings.
Children are given different types of school education and health care facilities by their
parents and the society. The peers, educators and society influence the decisions
regarding human capital investments even at the tertiary level, that is, at the college
level. Moreover, the human capital formation at this stage is dependent upon the already
formed human capital at the school level. Human capital formation is partly a social
process and partly a conscious decision of the possessor of the human capital.
You know that the owner of a physical capital, say a bus, need not be present in
the place where it is used; whereas, a bus-driver, who possesses the knowledge and
ability to drive the bus, should be present when the bus is used for transportation of
people and materials. Physical capital is tangible and can be easily sold in the market
like any other commodity. Human capital is intangible; it is endogenously built in the
body and mind of its owner. Human capital is not sold in the market; only the services
of the human capital are sold and, hence, there arises the necessity of the owner of the
human capital to be present in the place of production. The physical capital is
separable from its owner, whereas, human capital is inseparable from its owner.
The two forms of capital differ in terms of mobility across space. Physical capital is
completely mobile between countries except for some artificial trade restrictions. Human
capital is not perfectly mobile between countries as movement is restricted by nationality
and culture. Therefore, physical capital formation can be built even through imports,
whereas human capital formation is to be done through conscious policy formulations
in consonance with the nature of the society and economy and expenditure by the
state and the individuals.
Both forms of capital depreciate with time but the nature of depreciation differs
between the two. Continuous use of machine leads to depreciation and change of
technology makes a machine obsolete. In the case of human capital, depreciation takes
place with ageing but can be reduced, to a large extent, through continuous investment
in education, health, etc. This investment also facilitates the human capital to cope
with change in technology which is not the case with physical capital.
Nature of benefits flowing from human capital are different from that of physical
capital. Human capital benefits not only the owner but also the society in general. This
is called external benefit. An educated person can effectively take part in a democratic
process and contribute to the socio-economic progress of a nation. A healthy person,
by maintaining personal hygiene and sanitation, stops the spread of contagious diseases
and epidemics. Human capital creates both private and social benefits, whereas physical
capital creates only private benefit. That is, benefits from a capital good flow to those
who pay the price for the product and services produced by it.
62

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

The concept of physical capital is
the base for conceptualising human
capital. There are some similarities
between the two forms of capital; there
are some striking dissimilarities as
well. See Box 4.1.
Human Capital and Economic
Growth: Who contributes more to
national income — a worker in a factory
or a software professional? We know
that the labour skill of an educated
person is more than that of an
uneducated person and that the former
generates more income than the latter.
Economic growth means the increase
in real national income of a country;
naturally, the contribution of the
educated person to economic growth
is more than that of an illiterate person.
If a healthy person could provide

Look at Fig. 4.2
and discuss.
(a) What are the advantages of
having proper ‘classroom’?
(b) Do you think the children
going to this schol are
receiving quality education?
(c)

Why these schools do not
have buildings?

uninterrupted labour supply for a
longer period of time, then health is
also an important factor for economic
growth. Thus, both education and
health, along with many other factors
like on-the-job training, job market
information and migration, increase an

Fig. 4.2 Creating human capital: a school being run in make shift premises in Delhi

HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA

63

individual’s income generating
capacity.
This enhanced productivity of
human beings or human capital
contributes substantially not only
towards
increasing
labour
productivity but also stimulates
innovations and creates ability to
absorb new technologies. Education
provides knowledge to understand
changes in society and scientific
advancements, thus, facilitate
inventions and innovations. Similarly,
the availability of educated labour
force facilitates adaptation to new
technologies.
Empirical evidence to prove that
increase in human capital causes
economic growth is rather nebulous.
This may be because of measurement
problems. For example, education
measured in terms of years of
schooling, teacher-pupil ratio and
enrolment rates may not reflect the
quality of education; health services
measured in monetary terms, life
expectancy and mortality rates may
not reflect the true health status of the
people in a country. Using the
indicators mentioned above, an
analysis of improvement in education
and health sectors and growth in real
per capita income in both developing
and developed countries shows that
there is convergence in the measures
of human capital but no sign of
convergence of per capita real income.
In other words, the human capital
growth in developing countries has
been faster but the growth of per capita
real income has not been that fast.
There are reasons to believe that the
64

Fig. 4.3 Scientific and technical manpower: a
rich ingredient of human capital

causality between human capital and
economic growth flows in either
directions. That is, higher income
causes building of high level of human
capital and vice versa, that is, high level
of human capital causes growth of
income.
India recognised the importance of
human capital in economic growth
long ago. The Seventh Five Year Plan
says, “Human resources development
(read human capital) has necessarily
to be assigned a key role in any
development strategy, particularly in
a country with a large population.
Trained and educated on sound lines,
a large population can itself become
an asset in accelerating economic
growth and in ensuring social change
in desired directions.”
It is difficult to establish a relation of
cause and effect from the growth of
human capital (education and health)
to economic growth but we can see in
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

TABLE 4.1
Select Indicators of Development in Education and Health Sectors
Particulars
Real Per Capita Income (in Rs)

1951
7,651

1981
12,174

1991
15,748

2001
23,095

2016-17
77,659

Crude Death
Rate (Per 1,000 Population)

25.1

12.5

9.8

8.1

6.3

Infant Mortality Rate

146

110

80

63

33

Male

37.2

54.1

59.7

63.9

67

Female

36.2

54.7

60.9

66.9

70

16.67

43.57

52.21

65.20

76

Life Expectancy
at Birth (in Years)
Literacy Rate (%)

Source: Economic Survey for various years, Ministry of Finance; National Statistical Office, Ministry
of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Government of India.

workforce, particularly involving
mathematics, computer science, and
data science, in conjunction with
multidisciplinary abilities across the
sciences and social sciences, and
humanities, will be increasingly in
greater demand. With climate change,
increasing pollution, and depleting
natural resources, there will be a
sizeable shift in how we meet the world’s
energy, water, food, and sanitation
needs, again resulting in the need for
new skilled labour, particularly in
biology,
chemistry,
physics,
agriculture, climate science, and
social science. The growing
emergence of epidemics and
pandemics will also call for
collaborative research in infectious
disease
management
and
development of vaccines and the
resultant social issues heightens
the need for multidisciplinary
learning. There will be a growing
demand for humanities and art, as
India moves towards becoming a
Fig. 4.4 Job on hand: transforming India into a developed country as well as
Table 4.1 that these sectors have grown
simultaneously. Growth in each sector
probably has reinforced the growth of
every other sector.
The National Education Policy
2020 states that the world is
undergoing rapid changes in the
knowledge landscape. With various
dramatic scientific and technological
advances, such as the rise of big data,
machine learning, and artificial
intelligence, many unskilled jobs
worldwide may be taken over by
machines, while the need for a skilled

knowledge economy

HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA

65

Box 4.2: India as a Knowledge Economy
The Indian software industry has been showing an impressive record over the
past two decades. Entrepreneurs, bureaucrats and politicians are now advancing
views about how India can transform itself into a knowledge-based economy by
using information technology (IT). There have been some instances of villagers
using e-mail which are cited as examples of such transformation. Likewise, egovernance is being projected as the way of the future. The value of IT depends
greatly on the existing level of economic development. Do you think IT - based
services in rural areas will lead to human development? Discuss.

among the three largest economies in
the world. This policy vision suggests
how human capital formation in India
will move its economy to a higher
growth trajectory based on knowledge
landscape.

4.4 H UMAN C APITAL AND H UMAN
DEVELOPMENT
The two terms sound similar but there
is a clear distinction between them.
Human capital considers education
and health as a means to increase
labour
productivity.
Human
development is based on the idea that
education and health are integral to
human well-being because only when
people have the ability to read and
write and the ability to lead a long
and
healthy
life,
they
will be able to make other choices
which they value. Human capital
treats human beings as a means to
an end; the end being the increase
in productivity. In this view, any
investment in education and health is
unproductive if it does not enhance
output of goods and services. In the
human development perspective,
66

human beings are ends in themselves.
Human welfare should be increased
through investments in education and
health even if such investments do not
result in higher labour productivity.
Therefore, basic education and basic
health are important in themselves,
irrespective of their contribution to
labour productivity. In such a view,
every individual has a right to get basic
education and basic health care, that
is, every individual has a right to be
literate and lead a healthy life.
Work This Out

Ø If a construction worker,
maid-servant, dhobi or a
peon in school has absented
herself/himself for long due
to ill health, find out how it
has affected her/his

(i) job security
(ii) wage/salary
What could be the possible
reasons?

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

4.5 S T A T E O F H U M A N C A P I T A L
FORMATION IN INDIA
In this section we are going to analyse
human capital formation in India. We
have already learnt that human
capital formation is the outcome
of investments in education, health,
on-the-job training, migration and
information. Of these education and
health are very important sources of
human capital formation. We know
that India is a federal country with a
union government, state governments
and local governments (Municipal
Corporations, Municipalities and
Village Panchayats). The Constitution
of India mentions the functions to
be carried out by each level of
government. Accordingly, expenditures on both education and health are
to be carried out simultaneously by all
the three tiers of the government.
Analysis of health sector is taken up
in Chapter 8; hence, we will analyse
only the education sector here.
Do you know who takes care of
education and health in India? Before
we take up the analysis of the education
sector in India, we will look into the
need for government intervention in
education and health sectors. We do
understand that education and health
care services create both private and
social benefits and this is the reason
for the existence of both private and
public institutions in the education and
health service markets. Expenditures
on education and health make
substantial long-term impact and they
cannot be easily reversed; hence,
government intervention is essential. For
HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA

instance, once a child is admitted to a
school or health care centre where the
required services are not provided,
before the decision is taken to shift the
child to another institution, substantial
amount of damage would have been
done. Moreover, individual consumers
of these services do not have complete
information about the quality of
services and their costs. In this
situation, the providers of education
and health services acquire monopoly
power and are involved in exploitation.
The role of government in this situation
is to ensure that the private providers of
these services adhere to the standards
stipulated by the government and
charge the correct price.
In India, the ministries of
education at the union and state level,
departments of education and various
organisations like National Council of
Educational Research and Training
(NCERT), University Grants Commission
(UGC) and All India Council of
Technical Education (AICTE) facilitate
institutions which come under the
education sector. Similarly, the
ministries of health at the union and
state level, departments of health and
various organisations like National
Medical Commission and Indian
Council for Medical Research (ICMR)
facilitate institutions which come under
the health sector.
In a developing country like India,
with a large section of the population
living below the poverty line, many
people cannot afford to access basic
education and health care facilities.
Moreover, a substantial section
of India’s population cannot afford
67

to reach super specialty health care
and higher education. Furthermore,
when basic education and health care
is considered as a right of the citizens,
then it is essential that the government
should provide education and health
services free of cost for the deserving
citizens and those from the socially
oppressed classes. Both, the union
and state governments, have been
stepping up expenditures in the
education sector over the years in
order to fulfil the objective of attaining
cent per cent literacy and considerably
increase the average educational
attainment of Indians.
Work This Out

Ø Identify the objectives and
functions of NCERT, UGC,
AICTE and ICMR.

4.6 EDUCATION SECTOR IN INDIA
Growth in Government Expenditure
on Education: Do you know how
much the government spends on
education? This expenditure by the
government is expressed in two ways
(i) as a percentage of ‘total government
expenditure’ (ii) as a percentage of
Gross Domestic Product (GDP).
The percentage of ‘education
expenditure of total government
expenditure’ indicates the importance
of education in the scheme of
things before the government. The
percentage of ‘education expenditure
of GDP’ expresses how much of
people’s income is being committed to
68

the development of education in
the country. During 1952-2014,
education expenditure as percentage
of total government expenditure
increased from 7.92 to 15.7 and as
percentage of GDP increased from
0.64 to 4.13. Throughout this period
the increase in education expenditure
has not been uniform and there has
been irregular rise and fall. To this if
we include the private expenditure
incurred by individuals and by
philanthropic institutions, the total
education expenditure should be
much higher.
Elementary education takes a major
share of total education expenditure
and the share of the higher/tertiary
education (institutions of higher
learning like colleges, polytechnics and
universities) is the least. Though, on an
average, the government spends less
on tertiary education, ‘expenditure per
student’ in tertiary education is higher
than that of elementary. This does not
mean that financial resources should be
transferred from tertiary education to
elementary education. As we expand
school education, we need more
teachers who are trained in the higher
educational institutions; therefore,
expenditure on all levels of education
should be increased.
In 2014-15, the per capita public
expenditure on elementary education
differs considerably across states from
as high as Rs 34,651 in Himachal
Pradesh to as low as Rs 4088 in Bihar.
This leads to differences in educational
opportunities and attainments across
states.
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

99 to 2006-07) to bring all
Indian children in the age
group of 6-14 years under
the purview of school
education. Compared to this
desired level of education
expenditure of around 6 per
cent of GDP, the current level
of a little over 4 per cent has
been quite inadequate. In
principle, a goal of 6 per cent
needs to be reached—this
Fig. 4.5 Investment in educational infrastructure is inevitable has been accepted as a must
for the coming years. In 2009,
the
Government
of India enacted the
One can understand the inadequacy
Right
of
Children
to Free and
of the expenditure on education if we
Compulsory
Education
Act to make
compare it with the desired level of
free education a fundamental right of
education expenditure as recommended
all children in the age group of 6-14
by the various commissions. The
years.
Education Commission (1964–66) had
Government of India has also
recommended that at least 6 per cent of
started
levying a 2 per cent ‘education
GDP be spent on education so as to
cess’
on
all Union taxes. The revenues
make a noticeable rate of growth in
from education cess has been
educational achievements. The Tapas
earmarked for spending on elementary
Majumdar Committee, appointed by
education. In addition to this, the
the Government of India in 1999,
government sanctions a large outlay for
estimated an expenditure of around Rs
1.37 lakh crore over 10 years (1998the promotion of higher education and

Work These Out

Ø Prepare case studies of dropouts at different levels of schooling, say
(i) Primary dropouts
(ii) Class VIII dropouts
(iii) Class X dropouts
Find out the causes and discuss in the class.

Ø ‘School dropouts are giving way to child labour’. Discuss how this is a loss
to human capital.

HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA

69

TABLE 4.2
Educational Attainment in India
Sl.No. Particulars
1.

2.

3.

Adult Literacy Rate (per cent of people aged 15+)
1.1 Male
1.2 Female
Primary completion rate (per cent of relevant age group)
2.1 Male
2.2 Female
Youth literacy rate (per cent of people aged 15+ to 24)
3.1 Male
3.2 Female

new loan schemes for students to
pursue higher education.
Educational Achievements in
India: Generally,
educational
achievements in a country are
indicated
in
terms
of adult literacy level, primary
education completion rate and youth
literacy rate. These statistics for the
last two decades are given above in
Table 4.2.

1990

2000

2011

2017-18

61.9
37.9

68.4
45.4

79
59

82
66

78
61

85
69

92
94

93
96

76.6
54.2

79.7
64.8

90
82

93
90

4.7 FUTURE PROSPECTS
Education for All — Still a Distant
Dream: Though literacy rates for both
— adults as well as youth — have
increased, still the absolute number
of illiterates in India is as much as
India’s population was at the time of
independence. In 1950, when the
Constitution of India was passed by the
Constituent Assembly, it was noted in
the Directive Principles of the

Fig. 4.6 School dropouts give way to child labour: a loss to human capital
70

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Constitution that the government
should provide free and compulsory
education for all children up to the age
of 14 years within 10 years from the
commencement of the Constitution.
Had we achieved this, we would have
cent per cent literacy by now.
Gender Equity — Better than Before:
The differences in literacy rates between
males and females are narrowing
signifying a positive development in
gender equity; still the need to promote
education for women in India is
imminent for various reasons such as
improving economic independence and
social status of women and also
because women education makes a
favourable impact on fertility rate and
health care of women and children.
Therefore, we cannot be complacent
about the upward movement in the
literacy rates and we have miles to go in
achieving cent per cent adult literacy.

unemployment among educated youth
is the highest. As per NSSO data, in the
year
2011-12,
the
rate
of
unemployment among youth males
who studied graduation and above in
rural areas was 19 per cent. Their urban
counterparts had relatively less level of
unemployment at 16 per cent. The most
severely affected ones were young rural
female graduates as nearly 30 per cent
of them are unemployed. In contrast to
this, only about 3-6 per cent of primary
level educated youth in rural and urban
areas were unemployed. The situation
is yet to improve as indicated by the
Periodic Labour Force Survey 2017-18.
Therefore, the government should
increase allocation for higher education
and also improve the standard of higher
education institutions, so that students
are imparted employable skills in such
institutions. When compared to less
educated, a large proportion of educated
persons are unemployed. Why?

4.8 CONCLUSION

Fig. 4.7 Higher Education: few takers

Higher Education — a Few Takers:
The Indian education pyramid is
steep, indicating lesser and lesser
number of people reaching the higher
education level. Moreover, the level of
HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA

The economic and social benefits of
human capital formation and human
development are well known. The union
and state governments in India have
been earmarking substantial financial
outlays for development of education
and health sectors. The spread of
education and health services across
different sectors of society should be
ensured so as to simultaneously attain
economic growth and equity. India has
a rich stock of scientific and technical
manpower in the world. The need of the
hour is to better it qualitatively and
provide such conditions so that they are
utilised in India.
71

Recap

Ø Investments in education convert human beings into human capital; human
capital represents enhanced labour productivity, which is an acquired ability
and an outcome of deliberate investment decisions with an expectation that
it will increase future income sources.

Ø Investments in education, on-the-job training, health, migration and
information are the sources of human capital formation.

Ø The concept of physical capital is the base for conceptualising human capital.
There are some similarities as well as dissimilarities between the two forms
of capital formation.

Ø Investment in human capital formation is considered as efficient and growth
enhancing.

Ø Human development is based on the idea that education and health are
integral to human well-being because only when people have the ability to
read and write and the ability to lead a long and healthy life, will they be
able to make other choices which they value.

Ø The percentage of expenditure on education of the total government
expenditure indicates the importance of education in the scheme of things
for the government.

EXERCISES

72

1.

What are the two major sources of human capital in a country?

2.

What are the indicators of educational achievement in a country?

3.

Why do we observe regional differences in educational attainment
in India?

4.

Bring out the dif ferences between human capital and human
development.

5.

How is human development a broader term as compared to human
capital?

6.

What factors contribute to human capital formation?

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

7.

How government organisations facilitate the functioning of schools
and hospitals in India?

8.

Education is considered to be an important input for the development
of a nation. How?

9.

Discuss the following as a source of human capital formation
(i) Health infrastructure
(ii) Expenditure on migration.

10.

Establish the need for acquiring information relating to health and
education expenditure for the effective utilisation of human
resources.

11.

How does investment in human capital contribute to growth?

12.

‘There is a downward trend in inequality world-wide with a rise in
the average education levels’. Comment.

13.

Examine the role of education in the economic development of a
nation.

14.

Explain how investment in education stimulates economic growth.

15.

Bring out the need for on-the-job-training for a person.

16.

Trace the relationship between human capital and economic growth.

17.

Discuss the need for promoting women’s education in India.

18.

Argue in favour of the need for different forms of government
intervention in education and health sectors.

19.

What are the main problems of human capital formation in India?

20.

In your view, is it essential for the government to regulate the fee
structure in education and health care institutions? If so, why?

SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES

1.

Identify how Human Development Index is calculated. What is the
position of India in the World Human Development Index?

2.

Is India going to be a knowledge based economy in the near future?
Discuss in the classroom.

3.

Interpret the data given in Table 5.2.

4.

As an educated person, what will be your contribution to the cause
of education? (Example ‘Each one — teach one’).

HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION IN INDIA

73

5.

Enlist the various sources that provide information regarding
education, health and labour.

6.

Read the annual reports of Union Ministries of Education and Health
and Family welfare and make summaries. Read the chapter on social
sector in the Economic Survey. These can be downloaded from websites
of the respective Union Government Ministries.
REFERENCES

Books
BECKER, GARY S. 1964. Human Capital. 2nd Edition, Columbia University
Press, New York.
F REEMAN , R ICHARD. 1976. The Overeducated American. Academic Press,
New York.
SIDDHARTHAN, N.S. AND K. NARAYANAN (Eds.). 2013. Human Capital and Development
— The Indian Experience. Springer, New Delhi.
Government Reports
India Human Development Report 2011: Towards Social Inclusion, Planning Commission, Government of India.
Educational Statistics At a glance, Ministry of Education (for various years),
Government of India.
Annual Reports, Ministry of Education, Government of India.
National Education Policy 2020, Ministry of Education, Govt. of India,
New Delhi.
Websites
http://epathshala.nic.in
www.education.nic.in
www.cbse.nic.in
www.ugc.ac.in
www.aicte.ernet.in
www.ncert.nic.in
www.finmin.nic.in
www.mospi.nic.in
http://nroer.gov.in

74

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

5

RURAL
DEVELOPMENT
After studying this chapter, the learners will
•

understand rural development and the major issues associated with it

•

appreciate how crucial the development of rural areas is for India’s overall
development

•

understand the critical role of credit and marketing systems in rural
development

•

learn about the importance of diversification of productive activities to
sustain livelihoods

•

understand the significance of organic farming in sustainable
development.

RURAL DEVELOPMENT

75

“Only the tillers of the soil live by the right. The rest form their train and eat
only the bread of dependence”.
Thiruvalluvar

5.1 INTRODUCTION
In Chapter 4, we studied how poverty
was a major challenge facing India. We
also came to know that the majority
of the poor live in rural areas where
they do not have access to the basic
necessities of life.
Agriculture is the major source of
livelihood in the rural sector. Mahatma
Gandhi once said that the real progress
of India did not mean simply the growth
and expansion of industrial urban
centres but mainly the development of
the villages. This idea of village
development being at the centre of the
overall development of the nation is
relevant even today. Why is this so?
Why should we attach such significance
to rural development when we see
around us fast growing cities with large
industries and modern information
technology hubs? It is because more
than two-third of India’s population
depends on agriculture that is yet to
become productive enough to provide
for them; one-fourth of rural India still
lives in abject poverty. That is the
reason why we have to see a developed
rural India if our nation has to realise
real progress. What, then, does rural
development imply?

5.2 WHAT IS RURAL DEVELOPMENT?
Rural development is a comprehensive
term. It essentially focuses on action for
the development of areas that are
76

lagging behind in the overall
development of the village economy.
Some of the areas which are
challenging and need fresh initiatives
for development in rural India include
• Development of human resources
including
– literacy, more specifically, female
literacy, education and skill
development
– health, addressing both sanitation
and public health
• Land reforms
• Development of the productive
resources of each locality
• Infrastructure development like
electricity, irrigation, credit,
marketing, transport facilities
including construction of village
roads and feeder roads to nearby
highways, facilities for agriculture
research and extension, and
information dissemination
• Special measures for alleviation
of poverty and bringing about
significant improvement in the living
conditions of the weaker sections
of the population emphasising
access to productive employment
opportunities
All this means that people engaged
in farm and non-farm activities in
rural areas have to be provided with
various means that help them increase
the productivity. They also need to be
given opportunities to diversify
into various non-farm productive
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

activities such as food processing.
Enabling them better and more
affordable access to healthcare,
sanitation facilities at workplaces and
homes and education for all would also
need to be given top priority for rapid
rural development.
It was observed in an earlier chapter
that although the share of agriculture
sector’s contribution to GDP was on a
decline, the population dependent on
this sector did not show any significant
change. Further, after the initiation of
reforms, the growth rate of agriculture
sector decelerated to about 3 per cent
per annum during the 1991-2012,
which was lower than the earlier years.
In recent years, this sector has become
volatile. During 2014-15, the GVA
growth rate of agriculture and its allied
sectors was less than one per cent.
Scholars identify decline in public
investment since 1991 as the major
Work These Out

Ø On a monthly basis, go through the
newspapers of your region and
identify the problems raised by
them in relation to rural areas and
the solutions offered. You could also
visit a nearby village and identify
the problems faced by people there.
Discuss this in the classroom.

Ø Prepare a list of recent schemes
and their objectives from the
government website https://
www.rural.nic.in. Collect the details
of how anyone of these schemes
implemented in your region/rural
neighbourhood areas. Discuss your
observations in class.
RURAL DEVELOPMENT

reason for this. They also argue that
inadequate infrastructure, lack of
alternate employment opportunities in
the industry or service sector,
increasing casualisation of employment
etc., further impede rural development.
The impact of this phenomenon can be
seen from the growing distress
witnessed among farmers across
different parts of India. Against this
background, we will critically look at
some of the crucial aspects of rural
India like credit and marketing
systems, agricultural diversification
and the role of organic farming in
promoting sustainable development.

5.3 CREDIT AND MARKETING IN RURAL
A REAS
Credit: Growth of rural economy
depends primarily on infusion of
capital, from time to time, to realise
higher productivity in agriculture and
non-agriculture sectors. As the time
gestation between crop sowing and
realisation of income after production is
quite long, farmers borrow from various
sources to meet their initial investment
on seeds, fertilisers, implements and
other family expenses of marriage,
death, religious ceremonies etc.
At the time of independence,
moneylenders and traders exploited
small and marginal farmers and
landless labourers by lending to them
on high interest rates and by
manipulating the accounts to keep
them in a debt-trap. A major change
occurred after 1969 when India
adopted social banking and multiagency approach to adequately meet
the needs of rural credit. Later, the
77

Box 5.1: The Poor Women’s Bank
‘Kudumbashree’ is a women-oriented community-based poverty reduction
programme being implemented in Kerala. In 1995, a thrift and credit society
was started as a small savings bank for poor women with the objective to
encourage savings. The thrift and credit society mobilised Rs 1 crore as thrift
savings. These societies have been acclaimed as the largest informal banks in
Asia in terms of participation and savings mobilised.
Source: www.kudumbashree.org. Visit this website and explore various other initiatives
undertaken by this organisation. Identify some factors which contributed to
their successes and discuss in the class.

National Bank for Agriculture and
Rural Development (NABARD) was set
up in 1982 as an apex body to
coordinate the activities of all
institutions involved in the rural
financing system. The Green
Revolution was a harbinger of major
changes in the credit system as it led to
the diversification of the portfolio of
rural credit towards productionoriented lending.
The institutional structure of rural
banking today consists of a set of
multi-agency institutions, namely,
commercial banks, regional rural banks
(RRBs), cooperatives and land
development banks. They are expected
to dispense adequate credit at cheaper

rates. Recently, Self-Help Groups
(henceforth SHGs) have emerged to fill
the gap in the formal credit system
because the formal credit delivery
mechanism has not only proven
inadequate but has also not been fully
integrated into the overall rural social
and community development. Since
some kind of collateral is required, vast
proportion of poor rural households
were automatically out of the credit
network. The SHGs promote thrift in
small proportions by a minimum
contribution from each member. From
the pooled money, credit is given to the
needy members to be repayable in
small instalments at reasonable interest
rates. By May 2019, nearly 6 crore

Work These Out

Ø In your locality/neighbourhood, you might notice self-help groups providing
credit. Attend few meetings of such self-help groups. Write a report on the
profile of a self-help group. The profile may include — when it was started,
the number of members, amount of savings and type of credit they provide
and how borrowers use the loan.

Ø You might also find that those who take a loan for starting self-employment
activities but use it for other purposes. Interact with few such borrowers.
Identify the reasons for not starting self employment activities and discuss
in the classroom.
78

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

women in India have become member
in 54 lakh women SHGs. About ` 1015,000 per SHG and another `2.5 lakhs
per SHG as a Community Investment
Support Fund (CISF) are provided as part
of renovating fund to take up self
employement for income generation.
Such credit provisions are generally
referred to as micro-credit programmes.
SHGs have helped in the empowerment
of women. It is alleged that the borrowings
are mainly confined to consumption
purposes. Why are borrowers not
spending for productive purposes?
Rural Banking — a Critical
Appraisal: Rapid expansion of the
banking system had a positive effect on
rural farm and non-farm output,
income and employment, especially
after the green revolution — it helped
farmers to avail services and credit
facilities and a variety of loans for
meeting their prodution needs. Famines
became events of the past; we have now
achieved food security which is reflected
in the abundant buffer stocks of grains.

However, all is not well with our
banking system.
With the possible exception of the
commercial banks, other formal
institutions have failed to develop a
culture of deposit mobilisation —
lending to worthwhile borrowers and
effective loan recovery. Agriculture loan
default rates have been chronically
high. Why farmers failed to pay back
loans? It is alleged that farmers are
deliberately refusing to pay back
loans. What could be the reasons?
Thus, the expansion and promotion
of the rural banking sector has taken a
backseat after reforms. To improve the
situation, In recent years, all the adults
are encouraged to open bank accounts
as a part of a scheme known as JanDhan Yojana. Those bank account
holders can get Rs. 1-2 lakh accidental
insurance coverage and overdraft
facilities for Rs. 10,000 and get their
wages if they get any government-related
jobs and works under MNREGA; old age
pension and other social security
payments ofthegovernmentare transferred

Work These Out
Ø In the last few years, you might have taken note — in your neighbourhood if you
are living in rural areas or read in the newspapers or seen on TV — of farmers
commiting suicides. Many such farmers had borrowed money for farming and other
purposes. It was found that when they were unable to pay back due to crop failure,
insufficient income and employment opportunities, they took such steps. Collect
information relating to such cases and discuss in the classroom.
Ø Visit banks that cater to rural areas. They may be primary agricultural cooperative
banks, land development banks, regional rural banks or district cooperative banks.
Collect details such as how many rural households borrowed from them, amount
generally borrowed, kinds of collateral used, interest rates and dues.
Ø If farmers who borrowed from cooperative banks could not pay back due to crop
failure and other reasons, their loans should be waived otherwise they may take
drastic decisions like committing suicides. Do you agree?
RURAL DEVELOPMENT

79

to bank accounts. There is no need to
keep minimum bank balance. This has
led to more than 40 crore people opening
bank accounts; indirectly it has promoted
thrift habit and efficient allocation of
financial resources particularly in rural
areas. Banks also could mobile funds of
more than Rs. 1,40,000 crores through
these accounts.

5.4 AGRICULTURAL MARKET SYSTEM
Have you ever asked yourself how food
grains, vegetables and fruits that we
consume daily come from different
parts of the country? The mechanism
through which these goods reach
different places depends on the market
channels. Agricultural marketing is a
process that involves the assembling,
storage, processing, transportation,
packaging, grading and distribution
of different agricultural commodities
across the country.
Prior to independence, farmers,
while selling their produce to traders,
suffered from faulty weighing and
manipulation of accounts. Farmers who
did not have the required information on

prices prevailing in markets were often
forced to sell at low prices. They also did
not have proper storage facilities to keep
back their produce for selling later at a
better price. Do you know that even today,
more than 10 per cent of goods produced
in farms are wasted due to lack of storage?
Therefore, government intervention
became necessary to regulate the activities
of the private traders.
Let us discuss four such measures
that were initiated to improve the
marketing aspect. The first step was
regulation of markets to create orderly
and transparent marketing conditions.
By and large, this policy benefited
farmers as well as consumers. However,
there is still a need to develop about
27,000 rural periodic markets as
regulated market places to realise the
full potential of rural markets. Second
component is provision of physical
infrastructure facilities like roads,
railways, warehouses, godowns, cold
storages and processing units. The
current infrastructure facilities are quite
inadequate to meet the growing demand
and need to be improved. Cooperative

Fig. 5.1 Regulated market yards benefit farmers as well as consumers
80

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Work These Out

Ø Visit a nearby vegetable and fruit market. Observe and identify different
characteristics of the market. Identify the place of origin of at least ten
different fruits and vegetables and distance travelled to reach the market.
Further, look at the modes of transport and its implication on prices.

Ø Most small towns have regulated market yards. Farmers can go to these
markets and sell their produce. They can also store their goods in the yard.
Visit one regulated market yard; collect the details of its functioning, kind
of goods coming to the yard and how prices are fixed. Prepare a detailed
report and discuss in the class.

marketing, in realising fair prices for
farmers’ products, is the third aspect
of government initiative. The success
of milk cooperatives in transforming the
social and economic landscape of
Gujarat and some other parts of the
country is testimony to the role of
cooperatives. However cooperatives
have received a setback during the
recent past due to inadequate coverage
of farmer members, lack of appropriate
link between marketing and processing
cooperatives and inefficient financial
management. The fourth element is the
policy instruments like (i) assurance of
minimum support prices (MSP) for
agricultural products (ii) maintenance
of buffer stocks of wheat and rice
by Food Corporation of India and
(iii) distribution of food grains and sugar
through PDS. These instruments are
aimed at protecting the income of the
farmers and providing foodgrains at a
subsidised rate to the poor. However,
despite government intervention, private
trade (by moneylenders, rural political
elites, big merchants and rich farmers)
predominates agricultural markets. The
RURAL DEVELOPMENT

need for government intervention is
imminent particularly when a large
share of agricultural products, is
handled by the private sector.
Agricultural marketing has come
a long way with the intervention of the
government in various forms. Some
scholars argue that commercialisation
of agriculture offers tremendous scope
for farmers to earn higher incomes
provided the government intervention
is restricted. What do you think about
this view?
Emerging Alternate Marketing
Channels: It has been realised that if
farmers directly sell their produce to
consumers, it increases their incomes.
Some examples of these channels are
Apni Mandi (Punjab, Haryana and
Rajasthan); Hadaspar Mandi (Pune);
Rythu Bazars (vegetable and fruit
markets in Andhra Pradesh and
Telangana) and Uzhavar Sandies
(farmers markets in Tamil Nadu).
Further, several national and
multinational fast food chains are
increasingly entering into contracts/
alliances with farmers to encourage
81

them to cultivate farm products
(vegetables, fruits, etc.) of the desired
quality by providing them with not only
seeds and other inputs but also assured
procurement of the produce at predecided prices. It is argued that such
arrangements will help in reducing the
price risks of farmers and would also
expand the markets for farm products.
Do you think such arrangements raise
incomes of small farmers.
Work This Out
ØVisit one such alternative marketing
system which farmers in your
locality, or in the neighbourhood
rural areas, use. How are they
different from regulated market
yards? Should they be encouraged
and supported by the government?
Why and how? Discuss.

In 2020, Indian Parliament passed
three laws to reform agriculture
marketing system. While some section
of farmers support these reforms, the
rest of the farmers oppose and these
Acts are still being debated. Collect
the details of these laws, debate and
discuss in the class.

greater risk in depending exclusively
on
farming
for
livelihood.
Diversification towards new areas is
necessary not only to reduce the risk
from agriculture sector but also to
provide productive sustainable
livelihood options to rural people.
Much of the agricultural employment
activities are concentrated in the
Kharif season. But during the Rabi
season, in areas where there are
inadequate irrigation facilities, it
becomes difficult to find gainful
employment. Therefore expansion
into other sectors is essential to
provide supplementary gainful
employment and in realising higher
levels of income for rural people to
overcome poverty and other
tribulations. Hence, there is a need to
focus on allied activities, non-farm
employment and other emerging
alternatives of livelihood, though
there are many other options available
for providing sustainable livelihoods
in rural areas.

5.5 DIVERSIFICATION INTO PRODUCTIVE
ACTIVITIES
Diversification includes two aspects one relates to change in cropping
pattern and the other relates to a shift
of workforce from agriculture to other
allied activities (livestock, poultry,
fisheries etc.) and non-agriculture
sector. The need for diversification
arises from the fact that there is
82

Fig. 5.2 Jaggery making is an allied activity
of the farming sector
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Box 5.2: Tamil Nadu Women in Agriculture (TANWA)
Tamil Nadu Women in Agriculture (TANWA) was a project initiated in the late 1980s
in Tamil Nadu to train women in latest agricultural techniques and in organic farming.
It encouraged women to actively participate in raising agricultural productivity and
family income. At a Farm Women’s Group in Thiruchirapalli, run by Anthoniammal,
trained women are successfully making and selling vermicompost and earning money
from this venture. Many other Farm Women’s Groups are creating savings in their
group by functioning like mini banks through a micro-credit system. With the
accumulated savings, they promote small-scale household activities like mushroom
cultivation, soap manufacture, doll making or other income-generating activities.
There could be similar initiatives in your area or your neighborhood rural areas.
Talk to organisation or women entrepreneurs and discuss the details in the class.

As agriculture is already
overcrowded, a major proportion of the
increasing labour force needs to find
alternate employment opportunities in
other non-farm sectors. Non-farm
economy has several segments in it;
some possess dynamic linkages that
permit healthy growth while others are
in subsistence, low productivity
propositions. The dynamic sub-sectors
include agro-processing industries,
food processing industries, leather
industry, tourism, etc. Those sectors
which have the potential but seriously
lack infrastructure and other
support include traditional
home-based industries like
pottery, crafts, handlooms etc.
Majority of rural women find
employment in agriculture while
men generally look for non-farm
employment. In recent times,
women have also begun looking
for non-farm jobs (see Box 5.2).

are the widely held species. Livestock
production provides increased stability
in income, food security, transport, fuel
and nutrition for the family without
disrupting other food-producing
activities. Today, livestock sector alone
provides alternate livelihood options to
over 70 million small and marginal
farmers including landless labourers. A
significant number of women also find
employment in the livestock sector.
Chart 5.1 shows the distribution of
livestock in India. Poultry accounts for
the largest share with 61 per cent
Chart 5.1: Distribution of Poultry and
Livestock in India, 2019

Animal Husbandry: In India,
the farming community uses the
mixed crop-livestock farming
system —cattle, goats, fowl
RURAL DEVELOPMENT

83

also emerging as important productive
sectors for diversification.

Fig. 5.3 Sheep rearing — an important income
augmenting activity in rural areas

followed by others. Other animals which
include camels, asses, horses, ponies
and mules are in the lowest rung. India
had about 303 million cattle, including
110 million buffaloes in 2019.
Performance of the Indian dairy sector
over the last three decades has been
quite impressive. Milk production in
the country has increased by about ten
times between 1951-2016. This can
be attributed mainly to the successful
implementation of ‘Operation Flood’. It
is a system whereby all the farmers can
pool their milk produced according to
different grading (based on quality),
processed and marketed to urban
centres through cooperatives. In this
system the farmers are assured of a fair
price and income from the supply of
milk to urban markets. As pointed out
earlier Gujarat state is held as a
success story in the efficient
implementation of milk cooperatives
which has been emulated by many
states. Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar
Pradesh,
Andhra
Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Punjab and Rajasthan,
are major milk producing states. Meat,
eggs, wool and other by- products are
84

Fisheries: The fishing community
regards the water body as ‘mother’ or
‘provider’. The water bodies consisting
of sea, oceans, rivers, lakes, natural
aquatic ponds, streams etc. are,
therefore, an integral and life-giving
source for the fishing community. In
India, after progressive increase in
budgetary allocations and introduction
of new technologies in fisheries and
aquaculture, the development of
fisheries has come a long way.
Presently, fish production from inland
sources contributes about 65 per cent
to the total value of fish production and
the balance 35 per cent comes from the
marine sector (sea and oceans). Today
total fish production accounts for
0.9 per cent of the total GDP. In India,
West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala,
Gujarat, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu
are major fish producing states. A large
share of fishworker families are poor.
Rampant underemployment, low per
capita earnings, absence of mobility
of labour to other sectors and a high
rate of illiteracy and indebtedness are
some of the major problems fishing
community face today. Even though
women are not involved in active
fishing, about 60 per cent of the
workforce in export marketing and 40
per cent in internal marketing are
women. There is a need to increase
credit facilities through cooperatives
and SHGs for fisherwomen to meet the
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

working capital requirements for
marketing.
Horticulture: Blessed with a varying
climate and soil conditions, India has
adopted growing of diverse horticultural crops such as fruits,
vegetables, tuber crops, flowers,
medicinal and aromatic plants, spices
and plantation crops. These crops play
a vital role in providing food and
nutrition, besides addressing
employment concerns. Horticulture
sector contributes nearly one-third of
the value of agriculture output and
six per cent of Gross Domestic Product
of India. India has emerged as a world
leader in producing a variety of fruits
like mangoes, bananas, coconuts,
cashew nuts and a number of spices
and is the second largest producer of
fruits and vegetables. Economic
condition of many farmers engaged in
horticulture has improved and it has
become a means of improving
livelihood for many unprivileged
classes. Flower harvesting, nursery

Fig. 5.5 Women in rural households take up beekeeping as an entrepreneurial activity

maintenance, hybrid seed production
and tissue culture, propagation of
fruits and flowers and food processing
are highly remunerative employment
options for women in rural areas.
Though, in terms of numbers, our
livestock population is quite
impressive but its productivity is quite
low as compared to other countries. It
requires improved technology and
promotion of good breeds of animals
to enhance productivity. Improved
veterinary care and credit
facilities to small and
marginal farmers and
landless labourers would
enhance
sustainable
livelihood options through
livestock
production.
Production of fisheries has
already
increased
substantially.
However
problems
related to over- fishing and
pollution need to be regulated

Fig. 5.4 Poultry has the largest share of total livestock in India

RURAL DEVELOPMENT

85

and controlled. Welfare programmes for
the fishing community have to be
reoriented in a manner which can provide
long-term gains and sustenance of
livelihoods. Horticulture has emerged as
a successful sustainable livelihood
option and needs to be encouraged
significantly. Enhancing its role requires
investment in infrastructure like
electricity, cold storage systems,
marketing linkages, small-scale
processing units and technology
improvement and dissemination.

prices, weather and soil conditions for
growing different crops etc. Though
IT is, by itself, no catalyst of change
but it can act as a tool for releasing
the creative potential and knowledge
embedded in the society. It also has
potential of employment generation in
rural areas. Experiments with IT and
its application to rural development are
carried out in different parts of India.

Other Alternate Livelihood Options:
The IT has revolutionised many sectors
in the Indian economy. There is broad
consensus that IT can play a critical
role in achieving sustainable
development and food security in the
twenty-first century. Governments can
predict areas of food insecurity and
vulnerability using appropriate
information and software tools so that
action can be taken to prevent or
reduce the likelihood of an emergency.
It also has a positive impact on the
agriculture sector as it can disseminate
information regarding emerging
technologies and its applications,

In recent years, awareness of the
harmful effect of chemical-based
fertilisers and pesticides on our health
is on a rise. Conventional agriculture
relies heavily on chemical fertilisers
and toxic pesticides etc., which enter
the food supply, penetrate the water
sources, harm the livestock, deplete the
soil and devastate natural eco-systems.
Efforts in evolving technologies which
are eco-friendly are essential for
sustainable development and one
such technology which is eco-friendly
is organic farming. In short, organic
agriculture is a whole system of

5.6 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT AND
ORGANIC FARMING

Box 5.3: Adoption of Village by Parliamentarians
In October, 2014, The Government of India introduced a new scheme called
Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY). Under this scheme, Members of India's
Parliament need to identify and develop one village from their constituencies. To
begin with, MPs can develop one village as a model village by 2016, and two more
by 2019, covering over 2,500 villages in India. According to the scheme, the village
can have a population of 3,000-5,000 in the plains and 1,000-3,000 in the hills
and should not be MPs' own or their spouse's village. MPs are expected to facilitate
a village development plan, motivate villagers to take up activities and built
infrastructure in the areas of health, nutrition and education.
Source: www.pib.nic.in accessed on 24 October 2014.

86

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Box 5.4: Organic Food
Organic food is growing in popularity across the world. Many countries have
around 10 per cent of their food system under organic farming. There are many
retail chains and supermarkets which are accorded with green status to sell
organic food. Moreover, organic foods command higher price of around 10-100
per cent than conventional ones.

farming that restores, maintains and
enhances the ecological balance. There
is an increasing demand for
organically grown food to enhance
food safety throughout the world (see
Box 5.4).
Benefits of Organic Farming:
Organic agriculture offers a means to
substitute costlier agricultural inputs
(such as HYV seeds, chemical fertilisers,
pesticides etc.) with locally produced
organic inputs that are cheaper and
thereby generate good returns on
investment. Organic agriculture also
generates income through exports as
the demand for organically grown crops
is on a rise. Studies across countries

have shown that organically grown food
has more nutritional value than
chemical farming thus providing us
with healthy foods. Since organic
farming requires more labour input
than conventional farming, India will
find organic farming an attractive
proposition. Finally, the produce is
pesticide-free and produced in an
environmentally sustainable way (see
Box 5.5).
Popularising organic farming
requires awareness and willingness on
the part of farmers to adapt to new
technology. Inadequate infrastructure
and the problem of marketing the
products are major concerns which
need to be addressed apart from an

Box 5.5: Organically Produced Cotton in Maharashtra
In 1995, when Kisan Mehta of Prakruti (an NGO) first suggested that cotton,
the biggest user of chemical pesticides, could be grown organically, the then
Director of the Central Institute for Cotton Research, Nagpur, famously remarked,
“Do you want India to go naked?” At present, as many as 130 farmers have
committed 1,200 hectares of land to grow cotton organically on the International
Federation of Organic Agriculture Movement’s standards. The produce was
later tested by the German Accredited Agency, AGRECO, and found to be of
high quality. Kisan Mehta feels that about 78 per cent of Indian farmers are
marginal farmers owning about less than 0.8 hectare but accounting for 20 per
cent of India’s cultivable land. For such farmers, organic agriculture is more
profitable in terms of money and soil conservation in the long run. Visit a farm
in your locality which uses organic manure and discuss the uses associated
with the farming practices. Present the report in your class.
Source: Lyla Bavadam, A Green Alternative, Frontline, 29 July 2005.

RURAL DEVELOPMENT

87

appropriate agriculture policy to
promote organic farming. It has been
observed that the yields from organic
farming are less than modern
agricultural farming in the initial years.
Therefore, small and marginal farmers
may find it difficult to adapt to largescale production. Organic produce may
also have more blemishes and a shorter
shelf life than sprayed produce.
Moreover choice in production of
off-season crops is quite limited in
organic farming. Nevertheless, organic
farming helps in sustainable
development of agriculture and India
has a clear advantage in producing
organic products for both domestic and
international markets. Do you think
food and non-food items cultivated
using organic farming methods will be
cheaper?

5.7 CONCLUSION
It is clear that until and unless some
spectacular changes occur, the rural

sector might continue to remain
backward. There is a greater need
today to make rural areas more
vibrant through diversification into
dairying,
poultry,
fisheries,
vegetables and fruits and linking up
the rural production centres with the
urban and foreign (export) markets
to realise higher returns on the
investments for the products.
Moreover, infrastructure elements
like credit and marketing, farmerfriendly agricultural policies and a
constant appraisal and dialogue
between farmers’ groups and state
agricultural departments are
essential to realise the full potential
of the sector.
Today we cannot look at the
environment and rural development as
two distinct subjects. There is need to
invent or procure alternate sets of ecofriendly technologies that lead to
sustainable development in different
circumstances. From these, each rural

Work These Out

Ø Make a list of five popular items that are organically produced in India.
Ø Visit a nearby super market, vegetable shop and/or a departmental shop.
Identify a few products. Prepare a chart comparing a few goods that are
produced organically and in the normal way on the basis of their prices,
shelf life, quality and the kind of advertisement through which they are
popularised.

Ø Visit a horticultural farm in the nearby locality. Collect the details of
goods that they cultivate on the farm. They could have diversified their
cropping patterns. Discuss with them the merits and demerits of the
diversification.

88

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

7.

What do you mean by agricultural marketing?

8.

Mention some obstacles that hinder the mechanism of agricultural
marketing.

9.

What are the alternative channels available for agricultural
marketing? Give some examples.

10.

Distinguish between ‘Green Revolution’ and ‘Golden Revolution’.

11.

Do you think various measures taken by the government to improve
agricultural marketing are sufficient? Discuss.

12.

Explain the role of non-farm employment in promoting rural
diversification.

13.

Bring out the importance of animal husbandry, fisheries and
horticulture as a source of diversification.

14.

‘Information technology plays a very significant role in achieving
sustainable development and food security’ — comment.

15.

What is organic farming and how does it promote sustainable
development?

16.

Identify the benefits and limitations of organic farming.

17.

Enlist some problems faced by farmers during the initial years of
organic farming.

18.

“Jan-Dhan-Yojna helps in the rural development.” Do you agree with
this statement? Explain.

REFERENCES

ACHARYA, S.S. 2004. Agricultural Marketing, State of the Indian Farmer, a
Millennium Study. Academic Foundation, New Delhi.
ALAGH, Y.K. 2004. State of the Indian Farmer, a Millennium Study — an Overview.
Academic Foundation, New Delhi.
CHAWLA, N.K., M.P.G. KURUP and V. P. SHARMA. 2004. Animal Husbandry, State of
the Indian Farmer, a Millennium Study. Academic Foundation, New Delhi.
DEHADRAI, P.V. and Y.S. YADAV. 2004. Fisheries Development, State of the Indian
Farmer, a Millennium Study. Academic Foundation, New Delhi.
JALAN, BIMAL. (Ed.). 1992. The Indian Economy: Problems and Perspectives.
Penguin Publication, New Delhi.
90

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

NARAYANAN, S. 2005. Organic Farming in India. NABARD Occasional Paper No:
38, Department of Agriculture and Rural Development, Mumbai.
SINGH, H.P., P.P. DUTTA and M. SUDHA. 2004. Horticulture Development, State of
the Indian Farmer, a Millennium Study. Academic Foundation, New Delhi.
SINGH, SURJIT and VIDYA SAGAR. 2004. Agricultural Credit in India: State of the
Indian Farmer, a Millennium Study. Academic Foundation, New Delhi.
SINHA, V.K. 1998. Challenges in Rural Development. Discovery Publishing
House, New Delhi.
TODARO, MICHAEL P. 1987. Economic Development in the Third World. Orient
Longman Ltd, Hyderabad.
TOPPO, E. 2004. Organic Vegetable Gardening: Grow Your Own Vegetables. Unit
for Labour Studies, Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai.
Government Reports
Successful Governance Initiatives and Best Practices: Experiences from Indian
States, Government of India in Coordination with Human Resource
Development Centre and UNDP, Planning Commission, Delhi, 2002.
Annual Reports, Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India, New
Delhi.
Basic Animal Husbandry and Fisheries Statistics ( for various years), Ministry
of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare, Government of India.

Websites
www.dahd.nic.in
www.saanjhi.gov.in
www.ruralindiaonline.org

RURAL DEVELOPMENT

91

6

EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH,
INFORMALISATION
AND OTHER ISSUES
After studying this chapter, the learners will

92

•

understand a few basic concepts relating to employment such as
economic activity, worker, workforce and unemployment

•

understand the nature of participation of men and women in various
economic activities in various sectors

•

know the nature and extent of unemployment

•

assess the initiatives taken by the government in generating employment
opportunities in various sectors and regions.

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

What I object to, is the ‘craze’ for machinery, not machinery as such. The
craze is for what they call labour-saving machinery. Men go on ‘saving labour’
till thousands are without work and thrown on the open streets to die of
starvation...
Mahatma Gandhi

6.1 INTRODUCTION
People do a variety of work. Some
work on farms, in factories, banks,
shops
and
many
other
workplaces; yet a few others work
at home. Work at home includes
not only traditional work like
weaving, lace making or variety of
handicrafts but also modern jobs
like programming work in the IT
industry. Earlier factory work
meant working in factories located
in cities whereas now technology
Fig. 6.1 Multinational companies sell footballs
has enabled people to produce
made in the houses of Jalandhar, Punjab
those factory-based goods at
home in villages. During Covid 19
for ourselves; we also have a sense of
pandemic in 2020-21, millions of
accomplishment when we work to meet
workers delivered their products and
the requirements of those who are
services through work from home.
dependent on us. Having recognised
Why do people work? Work plays
the importance of work, Mahatma
an important role in our lives as
Gandhi insisted upon education and
individuals and as members of society.
training through a variety of works
People work for ‘earning’ a living. Some
including craft.
people get, or have, money by inheriting
Studying about working people
it, not working for it. This does not
gives us insights into the quality and
completely satisfy anybody. Being
nature of employment in a country and
employed in work gives us a sense of
helps in understanding and planning
self-worth and enables us to relate
our human resources. It helps us to
ourselves meaningfully with others.
analyse the contribution made by
Every working person is actively
different industries and sectors towards
contributing to national income and
national income. It also helps us to
hence, the development of the country
address many social issues such as
by engaging in various economic
exploitation of marginalised sections of
activities — that is the real meaning of
the society, child labour, etc.
‘earning’ a living. We do not work only
EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES

93

6.2 WORKERS

AND EMPLOYMENT

What is employment? Who is a worker?
When a farmer works on fields, he or
she produces food grains and raw
materials for industries. Cotton
becomes cloth in textile mills and in
powerlooms. Lorries transport goods
from one place to another. We know
that the total money value of all such
final goods and services produced in a
country in a year is called its gross
domestic product for that year. When
we also consider what we pay for our
imports and get from our exports we
find that there is a net earning for the
country which may be positive (if we
have exported more in value terms than
imported) or negative (if imports
exceeded exports in value terms) or zero
(if exports and imports were of the same
value). When we add this earning (plus
or minus) from foreign transactions,
what we get is called the country’s gross
national product for that year.
Those activities which contribute to
the gross national product are called
economic activities. All those who are
engaged in economic activities, in
whatever capacity — high or low, are
workers. Even if some of them
temporarily abstain from work due to
illness, injury or other physical
disability, bad weather, festivals, social
or religious functions, they are also
workers. Workers also include all those
who help the main workers in these
activities. We generally think of only
those who are paid by an employer for
their work as workers. This is not so.
Those who are self-employed are also
workers.
94

The nature of employment in India
is multifaceted. Some get employment
throughout the year; some others get
employed for only a few months in a
year. Many workers do not get fair
wages for their work. While estimating
the number of workers, all those who
are engaged in economic activities are
included as employed. You might be
interested in knowing the number of
people actively engaged in various
economic activities. During 2017-18,
India had about a 471 million strong
workforce. Since majority of our people
reside in rural areas, the proportion of
workforce residing there is higher. The
Work This Out

Ø

In
your
house
or
neighbourhood, you might
come across many women
who, even though they
have technical degrees
and diplomas and also free
time to go to work, do not
go to work. Ask them the
reasons for not going to
work. List all of them and
discuss in the classroom
whether they should go for
work and why, and also
ways by which they could
be sent for work. Some
social scientists argue that
housewives working at
home without getting paid
for that work must also be
regarded as contributing to
the gross national product
and therefore, as engaged
in an economic activity.
Would you agree?
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

rural workers constitute about twothirds of this 471 million. Men form
the majority of workforce in India.
About 77 per cent of the workers are
men and the rest are women (men and
women include child labourers in
respective sexes). Women workers
account for one-fourth of the rural
workforce whereas in urban areas,
they are just one-fifth of the
workforce. Women carry out works
like cooking, fetching water and
fuelwood and participate in farm
labour. They are not paid wages in
cash or in the form of grains; at times
they are not paid at all. For this
reason, these women are not
categorised as workers. Economists
argue that these women should also
be called workers. What do you think?

6.3 P ARTICIPATION OF P EOPLE IN
E MPLOYMENT
Worker-population ratio is an indicator
which is used for analysing the
employment situation in the country.
This ratio is useful in knowing the
proportion of population that is
actively contributing to the production
of goods and services of a country. If
the ratio is higher, it means that the
engagement of people is greater; if the
ratio for a country is medium, or low,
it means that a very high proportion
of its population is not involved
directly in economic activities.
You might have already studied,
in lower classes, the meaning of the
term ‘population’. Population is
defined as the total number of people
who reside in a particular locality at

a particular point of time. If you want
to know the worker-population ratio
for India, divide the total number of
workers in India by the population in
India and multiply it by 100, you will
get the worker-population ratio for
India.
If you look at Table 6.1, it shows
the different levels of participation of
people in economic activities. For
every 100 persons, about 35 (by
rounding off 34.7) are workers in
India. In urban areas, the proportion
is about 34, whereas in rural India, the
ratio is about 35. Why is there such a
difference? People in rural areas have
limited resources to earn a higher
income and participate more in the
employment market. Many do not go
to schools, colleges and other training
institutions. Even if some go, they
discontinue in the middle to join the
workforce; whereas, in urban areas, a
considerable section is able to study in
various educational institutions. Urban
people have a variety of employment
opportunities. They look for the
appropriate job to suit their
qualifications and skills. In rural areas,
people cannot stay at home as their
economic condition may not allow them
to do so.
TABLE 6.1
Worker-Population Ratio in India,
2017-2018
Sex

Worker-Population Ratio
Total

Rural

Urban

Men

52.1

51.7

53.0

Women

16.5

17.5

14.2

Total

34.7

35.0

33.9

EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES

95

Work These Out

Ø Any study of employment
must start with a review
of the worker -population
ratios — why?

Ø In some communities, you
might have noticed that
even if the males do not
earn a high income, they do
not send women to work.
Why?

tion of work leads to non-recognition
of women’s work and, therefore, to the
underestimation of the number of
women workers in the country. Think
of the women actively engaged in many
activities within the house and at
family farms who are not paid for such
work. As they certainly contribute to
the maintenance of the household and
farms, do you think that their number
should be added to the number of
women workers?

6.4 S E L F - E M P L O Y E D

AND

HIRED

Compared to females, more males
WORKERS
are found to be working. The
difference in participation rates is very
Does the worker-population ratio say
large in urban areas: for every 100
anything about workers’ status in
urban females, only about 14 are
society or about the working
engaged in some economic activities.
conditions? By knowing the status
In rural areas, for every 100 rural
with which a worker is placed in an
women about 18 participate in the
enterprise, it may be possible to know
employment market. Why are women,
one dimension — quality of
in general, and urban women, in
employment in a country. It also
particular,
not
working?
It
is
common to find that
where men are able
to
earn
high
incomes, families
discourage female
members
from
taking up jobs.
Going back to
what has already
been mentioned
above,
many
household activities
done by women are
not recognised as
productive work.
Fig. 6.2 Brick-making: a form of casual work
This narrow defini96

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

workforce.
Such
labourers
are
casually
Chart 6.1 : Distribution of Employment
engaged in others’ farms
and, in return, get a
Male Workers
Female Workers
remuneration for the
work done. Workers like
the civil engineer
52%
24%
27%
working
in
the
52%
construction company
24%
account for 23 per cent
21%
of India’s workforce.
When
a worker is
engaged
by
someone or
Self-employed
Regular Salaried Employees
an enterprise and paid
Casual Wage Labourers
his or her wages on a
regular basis, they are
known as regular
enables us to know the attachment a
salaried employees (see table 6.3).
worker has with his or her job and
Look at Chart 6.1 you will notice
the authority she or he has over the
that
self-employment is a major source
enterprise and over other co-workers.
of
livelihood
for both men and women
Let us take three workers from the
as
this
category
accounts for more
construction industry — a cement
than
50
per
cent
of the workforce.
shop owner, a construction worker and
Casual wage work is the second major
a civil engineer of a construction
source for both men and women,
company. Since the status of each one
of them is different from
another, they are also
Chart 6.2 : Distribution of Employment by Region
called differently. Workers
Urban Workers
Rural Workers
who own and operate an
15%
38%
enterprise to earn their
58%
29%
livelihood are known as
self-employed. Thus the
cement shop owner is
self-employed. About 52
per cent workforce in
13%
47%
India belongs to this
category. The construction
Casual Wage Labourers
Regular Salaried Employees
workers are known as
casual wage labourers;
Self-employed
they account for about
25 per cent of India’s
EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES

97

a little more so for the latter (24-27
per cent). When it comes to regular
salaried employment, both women and
men are found to be so engaged in
greater proportion. Men form 23 per
cent whereas women form 21 per cent.
The gap between men and women is
very less.
When we compare the distribution
of workforce in rural and urban areas
in Chart 6.2 you will notice that the selfemployed and casual wage labourers
are found more in rural areas than in

urban areas. In the latter, both selfemployment and regular wage salaried
jobs are greater. In the former, since
majority of those depending on farming
own plots of land and cultivate
independently, the share of selfemployed is greater.
The nature of work in urban areas
is different. Obviously everyone cannot
run factories, shops and offices of
various types. Moreover enterprises in
urban areas require workers on a
regular basis.

Work These Out

Ø We generally think that only those who are doing paid work regularly or casually
such as agricultural labourers, factory workers, those who work in banks
and other offices as assistants and clerks are workers. From the above
discussion, you must have understood that those who are self- employed such
as pavement vegetable vendors, professionals such as lawyers, doctors and
engineers are also workers. Mark (a), (b) and (c) against self-employed, regular
salaried employees and casual wage labourers respectively:
1. Owner of a saloon
2. Worker in a rice mill who is paid on daily basis but employed regularly
3. Cashier in State Bank of India
4. Typist working in a state government office on a daily wage basis but
paid monthly
5. A handloom weaver
6. Loading worker in wholesale vegetable shop
7. Owner of a cool drinks shop which sells Pepsi, Coca Cola and Mirinda
8. Nurse in a private hospital who gets monthly salary and has been working regularly for the past 5 years.

Ø Economists point out that casual wage labourers are the most vulnerable
among the three categories. Could you locate who these workers are and where
they are found and why?

Ø Can we say that the self-employed earn more than the casual wage labourers
or regular salaried employees? Identify a few other indicators of quality of
employment.

98

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

6.5 E M P L O Y M E N T I N
FIRMS, FACTORIES
AND OFFICES
In the course of
economic development
of a country, labour
flows from agriculture
and other related
activities to industry and
services. In this process,
workers migrate from
rural to urban areas. Fig. 6.3 Garment workers: upcoming factory employment for women
Eventually, at a much
(viii) Services. For simplicity, all the
later stage, the industrial sector begins
working persons engaged in these
to lose its share of total employment
divisions can be clubbed into three
as the service sector enters a period of
major sectors viz., (a) primary sector
rapid expansion. This shift can be
which includes (i) and (ii), (b) secondary
understood by looking at the
sector which includes (iii), (iv) and (v)
distribution of workers by industry.
and (c) service sector which includes
Generally, we divide all economic
divisions (vi), (vii) and (viii). Table 6.2
activities into eight different industrial
shows the distribution of working
divisions. They are (i) Agriculture (ii)
persons in different industries during
Mining
and
Quarrying
(iii)
the year 2017-18.
Manufacturing (iv) Electricity, Gas and
Primary sector is the main source
Water Supply (v) Construction (vi)
of employment for majority of workers
Trade (vii) Transport and Storage and
TABLE 6.2
Distribution of Workforce by Industry, 2017-2018
Industrial Category

Place of Residence

Sex

Total

Rural

Urban

Men

Female

Primary Sector

59.8

6.6

40.7

57.1

44.6

Secondary Sector

20.4

34.3

26.5

17.7

24.4

Tertiary / Service Sector

19.8

59.1

32.8

25.2

31.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

Total

EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES

99

Work This Out

Ø All newspapers have one section meant for job opportunities. Some also
devote an entire supplement in a day or every week like Opportunities in
The Hindu or Ascent in The Times of India. Many companies advertise
vacancies for various positions. Cut those sections. Develop a table which
contains four columns: whether the company is private or public, name of
the post, number of posts, sector — primary, secondary or tertiary — and
qualification required. Analyse the table in the classroom about jobs
advertised in the newspapers.

in India. Secondary sector provides
employment to only about 24 per cent
of workforce. About 31 per cent of
workers are in the service sector. Table
6.2 also shows that about 60 per cent
of the workforce in rural India depends
on agriculture, forestry and fishing.
About 20 per cent of rural workers are
working in manufacturing industries,
construction and other industrial
activities. Service sector provides
employment to about 20 per cent of
rural workers. Agriculture is not a
major source of employment in urban
areas where people are mainly engaged
in the service sector. About 60 per cent
of urban workers are in the service
sector. The secondary sector gives
employment to about one-third of
urban workforce.
Though both men and women
workers are concentrated in the
primary sector, women workers’
concentration is very high there. About
57 per cent of the female workforce
is employed in the primary sector
whereas less than half of males work
in that sector. Men get opportunities
in both secondary and service sectors.
100

6.6

GROWTH AND CHANGING
STRUCTURE OF EMPLOYMENT

In Chapters 2 and 3, you might have
studied about the planning strategies
in detail. Here we will look at two
developmental indicators — growth of
employment and GDP. Nearly seventy
years of planned development have
been aimed at expansion of the
economy through increase in national
output and employment.
During the period 1950–2010,
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of India
grew positively and was higher than
the employment growth. However,
there was always fluctuation in the
growth of GDP. During this period,
employment grew at the rate of not
more than 2 per cent.
Chart 6.3 also points at another
disheartening development in the late
1990s: employment growth started
declining and reached the level of
growth that India had in the early
stages of planning. During these
years, we also find a widening gap
between the growth of GDP and
employment. This means that in the
Indian economy, without generating
employment, we have been able to
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

produce more goods and services.
Scholars refer to this phenomenon as
jobless growth.
So far we have seen how employment
has grown in comparison to GDP. Now it
is necessary to know how the growth
patter n of employment and GDP
affected different sections of workforce.
Fr om this we will also be able to
understand what types of employment
are generated in our country.
Let us look at two indicators that
we have seen in the preceding sections
— employment of people in various
industries and their status. We know
that India is an agrarian nation; a
major section of population lives in
rural areas and is dependent on
agriculture as their main livelihood.

Developmental strategies in many
countries, including India, have aimed
at reducing the proportion of people
depending on agriculture.
Distribution of workforce by
industrial sectors shows substantial
shift from farm work to non-farm work
(see Table 6.3). In 1972-73, about 74
per cent of workforce was engaged in
primary sector and in 2011-12, this
proportion has declined to about
50 per cent. Secondary and service
sectors are showing promising future
for the Indian workforce. You may
notice that the shares of these sectors
have increased from 11 to 24 per cent
and 15 to 27 per cent, respectively.
The distribution of workforce in
different status indicates that over the

Chart 6.3: Growth of Employment and Gross Domestic
Product, 1951–2012 (%)

Note: *This is the period for which comparable and authentic data are available.

EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES

101

TABLE 6.3
Trends in Employment Pattern (Sector-wise and Status-wise), 1972-2018 (in %)
Item

1972-73

1983

1993-94

2011-2012 2017-2018

Sector
Primary

74.3

68.6

64

48.9

44.6

Secondary

10.9

11.5

16

24.3

24.4

Services

14.8

16.9

20

26.8

31.0

Total

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

Self-employed

61.4

57.3

54.6

52.0

52.2

Regular Salaried Employees

15.4

13.8

13.6

18.0

22.8

Casual Wage Labourers

23.2

28.9

31.8

30.0

25.0

Total

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

Status

last five decades (1972-2018), people
have moved from self-employment and
regular salaried employment to casual
wage work. Yet self-employment
continues to be the major employment
provider. Look at the last column of
table 6.3. How do you understand the
stagnation of secondary sector and
moderate rise in self-employement
during 2011-18? Discuss in the class.
Scholars call the process of moving

from self-employment and regular
salaried employment to casual wage
work noticed during 1972-94 as
casualisation of workforce. This
makes the workers highly vulnerable.
How? Look at the case study of
Ahmedabad in the preceding section.
In the mean time you also notice
in 2017-18 a moderate rise in the
share of regular salaried employees.
How do you explain this phenomenon?

Work These Out
ØDo you know that maintaining employment growth at 2 per cent for a country like
India is not an easy thing? Why?
Ø What will happen if there is no additional employment generated in the economy
even though we are able to produce goods and services in the economy? How could
jobless growth happen?
Ø Economists say that if casualisation increases the earning of the people, such
phenomenon should be welcomed. Suppose a marginal farmer becomes a full-time
agricultural labourer, do you think he will be happy even if he earns more in his
daily wage work? Or will a permanent and regular worker of the pharmaceutical
industry be happy if he becomes a daily wage labourer, even if his or her overall
earnings increase? Discuss in the classroom.
102

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

6.7 I N F O R M A L I S A T I O N O F I N D I A N
WORKFORCE
In the previous section we have found
that the proportion of hired work jobs working for others has been increasing.
One of the objectives of development
planning in India, since India’s
independence, has been to provide
decent livelihood to its people. It has
been envisaged that the industrialisation
strategy would bring surplus workers
from agriculture to industry with better
standard of living as in developed
countries. We have seen in the preceding
section, that even after 70 years of
planned development, more than half
of the Indian workforce depends on
farming as the major source of livelihood.
Economists argue that, over the
years, the quality of employment has
been deteriorating. Even after working for
more than 10-20 years, why do some
workers not get maternity benefit,
provident fund, gratuity and pension?
Why does a person working in the
private sector get a lower salary as
compared to another person doing the
same work but in the public sector?
You may find that a small section of
Indian workforce is getting regular
income. The government, through its

labour laws, enable them to protect their
rights in various ways. This section of the
workforce forms trade unions, bargains
with employers for better wages and other
social security measures. Who are they?
To know this we classify workforce into
two categories: workers in formal and
informal sectors, which are also referred
to as organised and unorganised
sectors. All the public sector
establishments and those private
sector establishments which employ
10 hired workers or more are called
formal sector establishments and those
who work in such establishments are
formal sector workers. All other
enterprises and workers working in those
enterprises form the informal sector.
Thus, informal sector includes millions
of farmers, agricultural labourers,
owners of small enterprises and people
working in those enterprises as also the
self-employed who do not have any
hired workers. It also includes all nonfarm casual wage labourers who work
for more than one employer such as
construction workers and headload
workers. You may note that this is one
of the ways of classifying workers.
There could be other ways of
classification as well. Discuss the
possible ways in the class.

Box 6.1: Formal Sector Employment
The information relating to employment in the formal sector is collected by the Union
Ministry of Labour through employment exchanges located in different parts of the country.
Do you know who is the major employer in the formal sector in India? In 2012, out of
about 30 million formal sector workers, about 18 million workers were employed by the
public sector. Here also men form the majority, as women constitute only about
one-sixth of the formal sector workforce. Economists point out that the reform process
initiated in the early 1990s resulted in a decline in the number of workers employed in
the formal sector. What do you think?

EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES

103

Fig. 6.4 Road side vending: an increasing variety of informal sector employment

Number of Workers
(in million)

the formal sectors in the country?
Those who are working in the formal
About only six per cent (30/473×100)!
sector enjoy social security benefits.
Thus, the rest 94 per cent are in the
They earn more than those in the
informal sector. In 2011-12, the year
informal sector. Developmental
for which gender wise data on
planning envisaged that as the economy
formal-informal sector employment is
grows, more and more workers would
available (Chart 6.4), about 20 per cent
become formal sector workers and the
of formal sector and 30 per cent of
proportion of workers engaged in the
informal sector workers are women.
informal sector would dwindle. But
what has happened in
India? Look at the
Sector, 2011-12
following chart which Chart 6.4: Workers in Formal and Informal
310
350
gives the distribution
300
of workforce in formal
250
and informal sectors.
24
133
200
We learnt that in
6
150
2011-12 there were
100
about 473 million
50
workers in India.
0
There were about 30
million workers in the
formal sector. Can you
Male
Female
estimate the percentage
of people employed in
104

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Box 6.2: Informalisation in Ahmedabad
Ahmedabad is a prosperous city with its wealth based on the produce of more
than 60 textile mills with a labour force of 1,50,000 workers employed in them.
These workers had, over the course of the century, acquired a certain degree
of income security. They had
secure jobs with a living
wage; they were covered by
social security schemes
protecting their health and
old age. They had a strong
trade union which not only
represented
them
in
disputes but also ran
activities for the welfare of
workers and their families.
In the early 1980s, textile
mills all over the country
began to close down. In some
places, such as Mumbai,
the mills closed rapidly. In
Change in the balance of power in a house: an
Ahmedabad, the process of
unemployed mill worker peeling garlic whereas his wife
closure was long drawn out
has a new job of beedi rolling.
and spread over 10 years.
Over this period, approximately over 80,000 permanent workers and over 50,000
non-permanent workers lost their jobs and were driven to the informal sector.
The city experienced an economic recession and public disturbances, especially
communal riots. A whole class of workers was thrown back from the middle
class into the informal sector, into poverty. There was widespread alcoholism
and suicides, children were withdrawn from school and sent to work.
Source: Renana Jhabvala, Ratna M. Sudarshan and Jeemol Unni (Ed.) Informal
Economy at Centre Stage: New Structures of Employment, Sage
Publications, New Delhi, 2003, pp.265.

Since the late 1970s, many
developing countries, including India,
started paying attention to enterprises
and workers in the informal sector
as employment in the formal sector
is not gr owing. Workers and
enterprises in the informal sector do not
get regular income; they do not have
any protection or regulation from the

government. Workers are dismissed
without
any
compensation.
Technology used in the informal sector
enterprises is outdated; they also do
not maintain any accounts. Workers
of this sector live in slums and are
squatters. Of late, owing to the efforts
of the International Labour Organisation
(ILO), the Indian government has

EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES

105

Work These Out
Tick (ü) mark against those which are in the informal sector

Ø Worker in a hotel which has seven hired workers and three family workers
Ø A private school teacher in a school which has 25 teachers
Ø A police constable
Ø Nurse in a government hospital
Ø Cycle-rickshaw puller
Ø The owner of a textile shop employing nine workers
Ø Driver of a bus company which has more than 10 buses with 20 drivers,
conductors and other workers

Ø Civil engineer working in a construction company which has 10 workers
Ø Computer operator in the state government office working on a temporary
basis

Ø A clerk in the electricity office.
initiated the modernisation of informal
sector enterprises and provision of
social security measures to informal
sector workers.

any vacancy in their factory or office.
Many in the rural areas do not go out
and ask for a job but stay home when
there is no work. Some go to

6.8 UNEMPLOYMENT
You might have seen
people looking for jobs in
newspapers. Some look
for a job through friends
and relatives. In many
cities, you might find
people standing in some
select areas looking for
people to employ them
for that day’s work. Some
go to factories and offices
and give their bio-data
and ask whether there is
106

Fig. 6.5 Unemployed mill workers waiting for casual jobs
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Employment and Training
data of Registration with
Employment Exchanges.
Though they provide
different estimates of
unemployment, they do
provide us with the
attributes
of
the
unemployed and the
variety of unemployment
prevailing in our country.
Do we have different types
of unemployment in our
Fig. 6.6 Sugar cane cutters: disguised unemployment is common economy? The situation
in farm works
described in the first
employment exchanges and register
paragraph of this section is called open
themselves for vacancies notified through
unemployment. Economists call
employment exchanges. The National
unemployment prevailing in Indian farms
Statistical Office (Previously it was known
as disguised unemployment. What is
as National Sample Survey Organisation)
disguised unemployment? Suppose a
defines unemployment as a situation in
farmer has four acres of land and he
which all those who, owing to lack of
actually needs only two workers and
work, are not working but either seek
himself to carry out various operations
work through employment exchanges,
on his farm in a year, but if he employs
intermediaries, friends or relatives or by
five workers and his family members
making applications to prospective
such as his wife and children, this
employers or express their willingness
situation is known as disguised
or availability for work under the
unemployment. One study conducted in
prevailing condition of work and
the late 1950s showed about one-third
remunerations. There are a variety of
of agriculture workers in India as
ways by which an unemployed person
disguisedly unemployed.
is identified. Economists define
You may have noticed that many
unemployed person as one who is not
people migrate to an urban area, pick
able to get employment of even one hour
up a job and stay there for some time,
in half a day.
but come back to their home villages
There are three sources of data on
as soon as the rainy season begins.
unemployment : Reports of Census of
Why do they do so? This is because
India, National Statistical Office’s
work in agriculture is seasonal; there
Reports of Employment and
are no employment opportunities in the
Unemployment Situation, Annual
village for all months in the year. When
Reports of Periodic Labour Force
there is no work to do on farms, people
Survey, and Directorate General of
go to urban areas and look for jobs.
EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES

107

6.9 GOVERNMENT AND
EMPLOYMENT GENERATION
You may recall about
the Mahatma Gandhi National
Rural Employment Guarantee
Act 2005. It promises 100 days
of guaranteed wage employment
to all rural households who
volunteer to do unskilled
manual work. The scheme
based on this Act is one of the
many
measures
the
government has implemented
to generate employment for
those who are in need of jobs
in rural areas.
Fig. 6.7 Dam construction work is a direct way of
Since Independence, the
employment generation by the government
Union and State governments
have played an important role in
This kind of unemployment is known
generating employment or creating
as seasonal unemployment. This is also
a common form of unemployment
opportunities for employment
prevailing in India.
generation. Their efforts can be
Though we have witnessed slow
broadly categorised into two — direct
growth of employment, have you seen
and indirect. In the first category, as
people being unemployed over a very
you have seen in the preceding section,
long time? Scholars say that in India,
the government employs people in
people cannot remain completely
various departments for administrative
unemployed for very long because their
purposes. It also runs industries,
desperate economic condition would
hotels and transport companies, and
not allow them to be so. You will rather
hence, provides employment directly
find them being forced to accept
to workers. When the output
jobs that nobody else would do,
of goods and services from
unpleasant or even dangerous jobs in
government enterprises increases, then
unclean, or unhealthy surroundings.
private enterprises which receive raw
The Central and State governments
materials from government enterprises
take
initiatives and generate
will also raise their output and hence
employment to facilitate a decent living
increase the number of employment
for low income families through various
opportunities in the economy. For
measures. These will be discussed in
example, when a government owned
the following section.
108

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

steel company increases its output, it
will result in direct increase in
employment in that government
company. Simultaneously, private
companies, which purchase steel from
it, will also increase their output and
thus employment. This is the indirect
generation
of
employment
opportunities by the government
initiatives in the economy.
Many programmes that the
governments implement, aimed at
alleviating poverty, are through
employment generation. They are
also known as employment
generation programmes. All these
programmes aim at providing not
only employment but also services in
areas such as primary health,
primary education, rural drinking
water, nutrition, assistance for people
to buy income and employment
generating assets, development of
community assets by generating
wage employment, construction of
houses and sanitation, assistance for
constructing houses, laying of rural
roads, development of wastelands/
degraded lands.

6.10 C ONCLUSION
There has been a change in the
structure of workforce in India. Newly
emerging jobs are found mostly in the
service sector. The expansion of the
service sector and the advent of high

technology now frequently permit a
highly competitive existence for efficient
small scale and often individual
enterprises or specialist workers side by
side with the multinationals.
Outsourcing of work is becoming a
common practice. It means that a
big firm finds it profitable to close
down some of its specialist
departments (for example, legal or
computer programming or customer
service sections) and hand over a large
number of small piecemeal jobs to very
small enterprises or specialist
individuals, sometimes situated even in
other countries. The traditional notion
of the modern factory or office, as a
result, has been altered in such
a manner that for many the home
is becoming the workplace. All of
this change has not gone in favour
of the individual worker. The nature
of employment has become more
informal with only limited availability
of social security measures to the
workers.
In the last few decades, there
has been rapid growth in the gross
domestic product, but without
simultaneous increase in employment
opportunities. This has forced the
government to take up initiatives in
generating employment opportunities
particularly in the rural areas.

EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES

109

Recap

Ø All those persons who are engaged in various economic activities and
hence contribute to gross national product are workers.

Ø About two-fifth of the total population in the country is engaged in various
economic activities.

Ø Men particularly rural men, form the major section of workforce in India.
Ø Majority of workers in India are self-employed. Casual wage labourers
and regular salaried employees together account for less than half the
proportion of India’s workforce.

Ø About three-fifth of India’s workforce depends on agriculture and other
allied activities as the major source of livelihood.

Ø In recent years, the growth of employment has decelerated.
Ø During post-reform period, India has been witness to employment
opportunities in the service sector. These new jobs are found mostly in
the informal sector and the nature of jobs is also mostly casual.

Ø Government is the major formal sector employer in the country.
Ø Disguised unemployment is a common form of unemployment in rural
India.

Ø There has been a change in the structure of the workforce in India.
Ø Through various schemes and policies, the government takes initiatives
to generate employment directly and indirectly.

EXERCISES

110

1.

Who is a worker?

2.

Define worker-population ratio.

3.

Are the following workers — a beggar, a thief, a smuggler, a gambler?
Why?

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

4.

Find the odd man out (i) owner of a saloon (ii) a cobbler (iii) a cashier
in Mother Dairy or Milk Cooperative Society of your area (iv) a tuition
master (v) transport operator (vi) construction worker.

5.

The newly emerging jobs are found mostly in the
(service/manufacturing).

6.

An establishement with four hired workers is known as
(formal/informal) sector establishment.

7.

Raj is going to school. When he is not in school, you will find him
working in his farm. Can you consider him as a worker? Why?

8.

Compared to urban women, more rural women are found working.
Why?

9.

Meena is a housewife. Besides taking care of household chores, she
works in the cloth shop which is owned and operated by her husband.
Can she be considered as a worker? Why?

10.

Find the odd man out (i) rickshaw puller who works under a rickshaw owner (ii) mason (iii) mechanic shop worker (iv) shoeshine boy.

11.

The following table shows distribution of workforce in India for the
year 1972-73. Analyse it and give reasons for the nature of workforce
distribution. You will notice that the data is pertaining to the situation
in India about 50 years ago!
Place of Residence

12.

sector

Workforce (in millions)
Male

Female

Total

Rural

125

69

195

Urban

32

7

39

The following table shows the population and worker population ratio
for India in 1999-2000. Can you estimate the workforce (urban and
total) for India?
Region

Estimates of
Population
(in crores)

Worker
Population
Ratio

Rural

71.88

41.9

Urban

28.52

33.7

Total

100.40

39.5

Estimated
No. of Workers
(in crores)
71.88 × 41.9 = 30.12
100
?

EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES

?

111

13.

Why are regular salaried employees more in urban areas than in
rural areas?

14.

Why are less women found in regular salaried employment?

15.

Analyse the recent trends in sectoral distribution of workforce in India.

16.

Compared to the 1970s, there has hardly been any change in the
distribution of workforce across various industries. Comment.

17.

Do you think that during 1950-2010 employment generated in the
country is commensurate with the growth of GDP in India? How?

18.

Is it necessary to generate employment in the formal sector rather
than in the informal sector? Why?

19.

Victor is able to get work only for two hours in a day. Rest of the day,
he is looking for work. Is he unemployed? Why? What kind of jobs
could persons like Victor be doing?

20.

You are residing in a village. If you are asked to advice the village
panchayat, what kinds of activities would you suggest for the
improvement of your village which would also generate employment.

21.

Who is a casual wage labourer?

22.

How will you know whether a worker is working in the informal sector?

SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES

112

1.

Select a region, say a street or colony, and divide it into 3-4
sub-regions. Conduct a survey by which you can collect the details
of activity each person living there is engaged in. Derive the
worker-population ratio for all the regions. Interpret the results for
differences in worker-population ratio for the different sub-regions.

2.

Suppose 3-4 groups of students are given different regions of a state.
One region is mainly engaged in cultivation of paddy. In another region,
coconut is the main plantation. The third region is a coastal region
where fishing is the main activity. The fourth region has a river nearby
with a lot of livestock rearing activities. Ask all the four groups to
develop a report on what kind of employment could be generated in
the four regions.

3.

Visit the local library and ask for Employment News, a weekly published
by the Government of India. Go through each issue for the last two
months. There will be seven issues. Select 25 advertisements and
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

fill in the following table (expand the table as needed). Discuss the
nature of jobs in the classroom.
Items
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Advertisement 1

Advertisement 2

Name of Office
Department/company
Private/public/joint venture
Name of the post
Sector—primary/seconday/
service
Number of posts/vacancies
Qualification required

6.
7.
4.

You might notice, in your locality, a variety of works being done by
the government, for example laying of roads, desilting of tanks,
construction of school buildings, hospital and other government
offices, construction of check dams and houses for the poor etc.
Prepare a critical assessment report on one such activity. The issues
covered could be the following (i) how the work was identified (ii)
amount sanctioned (iii) contribution of local people, if any (iv) number
of persons involved — both men and women (v) wages paid (vi) is it
really required in that area and other critical comments on the
implementation of the scheme under which the work is being carried
out.

5.

In recent years, you may have noticed that many voluntary
organisations also take initiatives to generate employment in hilly
and dry land regions. If you find such initiatives in your locality, visit
and prepare a report.
REFERENCES

CHADHA, G.K. and P.P. SAHU, 2002. ‘Post-reform Setbacks in Rural Employment:
Issues that need further scrutiny.’ Economic and Political Weekly, May
25, pp.1998-2026.
DESAI, S and M.B.DAS. 2004. ‘Is Employment Driving India’s Growth Surge’,
Economic and Political Weekly, July 3, pp. 3045-3051.
GHOSE, AJIT K. 1999. ‘Current Issues of Employment Policy in India.’ Economic
and Political Weekly, September 4, pp. 2592-2608.
HIRWAY, INDIRA. 2002. ‘Employment and Unemployment Situation in 1990s:
How Good are NSS Data.’ Economic and Political Weekly, May 25,
pp. 2027-2036.
EMPLOYMENT : GROWTH, INFORMALISATION AND OTHER ISSUES

113

J ACOB, PAUL. 1986. ‘Concept of ‘work’ and estimates of ‘workforce’ — An
appraisal of the treatment of activities relating to non-marketed output,’
Sarvekshana, Vol.IX, No.4, April.
KULSHRESHTHA, A.C., GULAB SINGH, ALOK KAR and R.L. MISHRA. 2000. ‘Workforce in
the Indian National Accounts Statistics,’ The Journal of Income and
Wealth, Vol.22, No.2, July, pp. 3-39.
PRADHAN, B.K. and M.R.SALUJA. 1996. ‘Labour Statistics in India: A Review.’
Margin, July- September, Vol.28, Number 4, pp. 319-347.
RATH, NILAKANTHA. 2001. ‘Data on Employment, Unemployment and Education:
Where to go from here?’ Economic and Political Weekly, June 9,
pp. 2081-2087.
SUNDARAM, K. 2001. ‘Employment-Unemployment Situation in the Nineties:
Some Results from NSS 55th Round Survey’, Economic and Political
Weekly, March 17, pp. 931-940.
SUNDARAM, K. 2001. ‘Employment and Poverty in 1990s: Further Results from
NSS 55th Round Employment-Unemployment Survey, 1999-2000,’
Economic and Political Weekly, August 11, pp. 3039-3049.
V ISARIA, PRAVIN. 1996. ‘Structure of the Indian Workforce, 1961-1994,’ The
Indian Journal of Labour Economics, Vol.39, No.4, pp. 725-740.
Government Reports
Annual Reports, Ministry of Labour, Government of India, Delhi.
Census of India 2011, Primary Census Abstract, Registrar General of Census
Operations, Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, Delhi.
Economic Survey, Ministry of Finance, Government of India.
Reports on Employment and Unemployment Situation in India, Ministry of
Statistics and Planning, Government of India.
Annual Report of Periodic Labour Force Survey 2017-18, National Statistical
Office, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Government
of India, New Delhi.
Websites
www.censusofindia.nic.in
www.mospi.nic.in

114

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

7

ENVIRONMENT AND
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

After studying this chapter, the learners will

•

understand the concept of environment

•

analyse the causes and effects of ‘environmental degradation’ and ‘resource
depletion’

•

understand the nature of environmental challenges facing India

•

relate environmental issues to the larger context of sustainable
development.

ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

115

The environment, left to itself, can continue to support life for millions of
years. The single most unstable and potentially disruptive element in the
scheme is the human species. Human beings, with modern technology, have
the capacity to bring about, intentionally or unintentionally, far-reaching
and irreversible changes in the enviornment.
Anonymous

7.1 INTRODUCTION
In the earlier chapters we have
discussed the main economic issues
faced by the Indian economy. The
economic development that we have
achieved so far has come at a very heavy
price — at the cost of environmental
quality. As we step into an era of
globalisation that promises higher
economic growth, we have to bear in
mind the adverse consequences of the
past developmental path on our
environment and consciously choose a
path of sustainable development. To
understand the unsustainable path of
development that we have taken and
the challenges of sustainable
development, we have to first
understand the significance and
contribution of environment to
economic development. With this in
mind, this chapter is divided into three
sections. The first part deals with the
functions and role of environment. The
second section discusses the state of
India’s environment and the third
section deals with steps and strategies
to achieve sustainable development.

7.2 ENVIRONMENT — DEFINITION AND
FUNCTIONS
Environment is defined as the total
planetary inheritance and the totality
of all resources. It includes all the biotic
116

and abiotic factors that influence each
other. While all living elements — the
birds, animals and plants, forests,
fisheries etc. — are biotic elements,
abiotic elements include air, water, land
etc. Rocks and sunlight are examples
of abiotic elements of the environment.
A study of the environment then calls
for a study of the inter-relationship
between these biotic and abiotic
components of the environment.
Functions of the Environment: The
environment performs four vital
functions (i) it supplies resources:
resources here include both renewable
and non-renewable resources.
Renewable resources are those which
can be used without the possibility of
the resource becoming depleted or
exhausted. That is, a continuous
supply of the resource remains
available. Examples of renewable
resources are the trees in the forests and
the fishes in the ocean. Non-renewable
resources, on the other hand, are those
which get exhausted with extraction
and use, for example, fossil fuel (ii) it
assimilates waste (iii) it sustains life by
providing genetic and bio diversity and
(iv) it also provides aesthetic services
like scenery etc.
The environment is able to perform
these functions without any interruption
as long as the demand on these
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

this
results
in
an
environmental crisis. This
is the situation today
all over the world. The
rising population of the
developing countries and
the affluent consumption
and production standards
of the developed world have
placed a huge stress on the
environment in terms of its
first two functions. Many
resources have become
extinct and the wastes
generated are beyond the
absorptive capacity of the
environment. Absorptive
Fig. 7.1 Water bodies: small, snow-fed Himalayan streams are
capacity means the ability
the few fresh-water sources that remain unpolluted.
of the environment to
absorb degradation. The result — we
functions is within its carrying
are today at the threshold of
capacity. This implies that the resource
environmental crisis. The past
extraction is not above the rate of
development has polluted and dried up
regeneration of the resource and the
rivers and other aquifers making water
wastes generated are within the
an economic good. Besides, the
assimilating capacity of the
intensive and extensive extraction of
environment. When this is not so, the
both renewable and non-renewable
environment fails to perform its third
resources has exhausted some of these
and vital function of life sustenance and
Work These Out

Ø Why has water become an economic commodity? Discuss.
Ø Fill in the following table with some common types of diseases and illnesses
that are caused due to air, water and noise pollution.
Air Pollution

Water Pollution

Asthma

Cholera

ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

Noise Pollution

117

Box 7.1: Global Warming
Global warming is a gradual increase in the average temperature of the earth’s
lower atmosphere as a result of the increase in greenhouse gases since the
Industrial Revolution. Much of the recent observed and projected global
warming is human-induced. It is caused by man-made increases in carbon
dioxide and other greenhouse gases through the burning of fossil fuels and
deforestation. Adding carbon dioxide, methane and such other gases (that
have the potential to absorb heat) to the atmosphere with no other changes
will make our planet’s surface warmer. The atmospheric concentrations of
carbon dioxide and CH4 have increased by 31 per cent and 149 per cent
respectively above pre-industrial levels since 1750. During the past century,
the atmospheric temperature has risen by 1.1°F (0.6°C) and sea level has
risen several inches. Some of the longer-term results of global warming are
melting of polar ice with a resulting rise in sea level and coastal flooding;
disruption of drinking water supplies dependent on snow melts; extinction of
species as ecological niches disappear; more frequent tropical storms; and an
increased incidence of tropical diseases.
Among factors that may be contributing to global warming are the burning
of coal and petroleum products (sources of carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous
oxide, ozone); deforestation, which increases the amount of carbon dioxide in
the atmosphere; methane gas released in animal waste; and increased cattle
production, which contributes to deforestation, methane production, and use
of fossil fuels. A UN Conference on Climate Change, held in Kyoto, Japan, in
1997, resulted in an international agreement to fight global warming which
called for reductions in emissions of greenhouse gases by industrialised nations.
Source: www.wikipedia.org

vital resources and we are compelled
to spend huge amounts on technology
and research to explore new resources.
Added to these are the health costs of
degraded environmental quality —
decline in air and water quality (seventy
per cent of water in India is polluted)
have resulted in increased incidence of
respiratory and water-borne diseases.
Hence the expenditure on health is also
rising. To make matters worse, global
environmental issues such as global
warming and ozone depletion also
contribute to increased financial
commitments for the government.
118

Thus, it is clear that the opportunity
costs of negative environmental
impacts are high.
The biggest question that arises is:
are environmental problems new to this
century? If so, why? The answer to this
question requires some elaboration. In
the early days when civilisation just
began, or before this phenomenal
increase in population, and before
countries took to industrialisation, the
demand for environmental resources
and services was much less than their
supply. This meant that pollution was
within the absorptive capacity of the
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Box 7.2: Ozone Depletion
Ozone depletion refers to the phenomenon of reductions in the amount of ozone
in the stratosphere. The problem of ozone depletion is caused by high levels
of chlorine and bromine compounds in the stratosphere. The origins of these
compounds are chlorofluorocarbons (CFC), used as cooling substances in airconditioners and refrigerators, or as aerosol propellants, and
bromofluorocarbons (halons), used in fire extinguishers. As a result of depletion
of the ozone layer, more ultraviolet (UV) radiation comes to Earth and causes
damage to living organisms. UV radiation seems responsible for skin cancer
in humans; it also lowers production of phytoplankton and thus affects other
aquatic organisms. It can also influence the growth of terrestrial plants. A
reduction of approximately 5 per cent in the ozone layer was detected from
1979 to 1990. Since the ozone layer prevents most harmful wavelengths of
ultraviolet light from passing through the Earth’s atmosphere, observed and
projected decreases in ozone have generated worldwide concern. This led to
the adoption of the Montreal Protocol banning the use of chlorofluorocarbon
(CFC) compounds, as well as other ozone depleting chemicals such as carbon
tetrachloride, trichloroethane (also known as methyl chloroform), and bromine
compounds known as halons.
Source: www.ceu.hu

environment and the rate of resource
extraction was less than the rate of
regeneration of these resources. Hence
environmental problems did not arise.

But with population explosion and with
the advent of industrial revolution
to meet the growing needs of the
expanding population, things
changed. The result was that the
demand for resources for both
production and consumption
went beyond the rate of
regeneration of the resources; the
pressure on the absorptive
capacity of the environment
increased tremendously — this
trend continues even today. Thus
what has happened is a reversal
of supply-demand relationship
for environmental quality — we
are now faced with increased
Fig. 7.2 Damodar Valley is one of India’s most demand for environmental
industrialised regions. Pollutants from the heavy
resources and services but their
industries along the banks of the Damodar river
supply is limited due to overuse
are converting it into an ecological disaster
ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

119

and misuse. Hence
the environmental
issues of waste
generation and
pollution
have
become critical
today.

7.3 STATE OF INDIA’S
ENVIRONMENT
India has abundant
natural resources in
terms of rich quality
of soil, hundreds of
rivers and tributaries,
Fig. 7.3 Deforestation leads to land degradation, biodiversity loss and
lush green forests,
air pollution
plenty of mineral
deposits beneath the land surface, vast
pressure on its finite natural
stretch of the Indian Ocean, ranges of
resources, besides creating impacts on
mountains, etc. The black soil of the
human health and well-being. The
Deccan Plateau is particularly suitable
threat to India’s environment poses a
for cultivation of cotton, leading to
dichotomy —threat of poverty-induced
concentration of textile industries in this
environmental degradation and, at the
region. The Indo-Gangetic plains —
same time, threat of pollution from
spread from the Arabian Sea to the Bay
affluence and a rapidly growing
of Bengal — are one of the most fertile,
industrial sector. Air pollution,
intensively cultivated and densely
water contamination, soil erosion,
populated regions in the world. India’s
deforestation and wildlife extinction
forests, though unevenly distributed,
are some of the most pressing
provide green cover for a majority of its
environmental concerns of India. The
population and natural cover for its
priority issues identified are (i) land
wildlife. Large deposits of iron-ore, coal
degradation (ii) biodiversity loss (iii) air
and natural gas are found in the
pollution with special reference to
country. India accounts for nearly
vehicular pollution in urban cities (iv)
8 per cent of the world’s total iron-ore
management of fresh water and (v) solid
reserves. Bauxite, copper, chromate,
waste management. Land in India
diamonds, gold, lead, lignite,
suffers from varying degrees and types
manganese, zinc, uranium, etc. are also
of degradation stemming mainly from
available in different parts of the
unstable use and inappropriate
country. However, the developmental
management practices.
activities in India have resulted in
120

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Box. 7.3: Chipko or Appiko — What’s in a Name?
You may be aware of the Chipko Movement, which aimed at protecting forests
in the Himalayas. In Karnataka, a similar movement took a different name,
‘Appiko’, which means to hug. On 8 September 1983, when the felling of trees
was started in Salkani forest in Sirsi
district, 160 men, women and children
hugged the trees and forced the
woodcutters to leave. They kept vigil in
the forest over the next six weeks. Only
after the forest officials assured the
volunteers that the trees will be cut
scientifically and in accordance with the
working plan of the district, did they
leave the trees.
When commercial felling by
contractors damaged a large number of
natural forests, the idea of hugging the
trees gave the people hope and
confidence that they can protect the
forests. On that particular incident, with
the felling discontinued, the people saved
12,000 trees. Within months, this
movement spread to many adjoining
districts.
Indiscriminate felling of trees for
fuelwood and for industrial use has led to many environmental problems.
Twelve years after setting up of a paper mill in Uttar Kanara area, bamboo
has been wiped out from that area. “Broad-leaved trees which protected the
soil from the direct onslaught of rain have been removed, the soil washed
away, and bare laterite soil left behind. Now nothing grows but a weed”, says
a farmer. Farmers also complain that rivers and rivulets dry up quicker, and
that rainfall is becoming erratic. Diseases and insects earlier unknown are
now attacking the crops.
Appiko volunteers want the contractors and forest officials to follow certain
rules and restrictions. For instance, local people should be consulted when
trees are marked for felling and trees within 100 metres of a water source
and on a slope of 30 degrees or above should not be felled.
Do you know that the government allocates forestlands to industries to
use forest materials as industrial raw material? Even if a paper mill employs
10,000 workers and a plywood factory employs 800 people but if they deprive
the daily needs of a million people, is it acceptable? What do you think?
Source: Excerpts from ‘State of India’s Environment 2: The Second Citizens’ Report 1984-85’,
Centre for Science and Environment, 1996, New Delhi.

ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

121

Some of the factors responsible
for land degradation are (i) loss
of vegetation occuring due to
deforestation (ii) unsustainable fuel
wood and fodder extraction (iii) shifting
cultivation (iv) encroachment into forest
lands (v) forest fires and over grazing
(vi) non-adoption of adequate soil
conservation measures (vii) improper
crop rotation (viii) indiscriminate use of
agro-chemicals such as fertilisers and
pesticides (ix) improper planning and
management of irrigation systems
(x) extraction of ground water in

the competing uses of land for
forestry, agriculture, pastures, human
settlements and industries exert an
enormous pressure on the country’s
finite land resources.
The per capita forest land in the
country is only 0.06 hectare against
the requirement of 0.47 hectare to meet
basic needs, resulting in an excess
felling of about 15 million cubic metre
forests over the permissible limit.
Estimates of soil erosion show that
soil is being eroded at a rate of 5.3
billion tonnes a year for the entire

Work These Out

Ø In order to enable the students to appreciate the contribution of environment
to economic development, the following game can be introduced. One student
may name a product used by any enterprise and the other student may
trace out its roots to nature and earth.
trucks
steel
rubber
books
cloth
petrol
machinery

steel and rubber
iron
mineral
trees
forests
paper
trees
cotton
plant
earth
iron
mineral

earth
earth
forest
nature

earth

earth

Ø A truck driver had to pay Rs 10,000 as challan as his truck was emitting
black soot. Why do you think he was penalised? Was it justified? Discuss.

excess of the recharge capacity (xi)
open access resource and (xii) poverty
of the agriculture-dependent people.
India supports approximately 17
per cent of the world’s human and 20
per cent of livestock population on a
mere 2.5 per cent of the world’s
geographical area. The high density
of population and livestock and
122

country as a result of which the
country loses 0.8 million tonnes of
nitrogen, 1.8 million tonnes of
phosphorus and 26.3 million tonnes
of potassium every year. According to
the Government of India, the quantity
of nutrients lost due to erosion each
year ranges from 5.8 to 8.4 million
tonnes.
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Box 7.4 : Pollution Control Boards
In order to address two major environmental concerns in India, viz. water and
air pollution, the government set up the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB)
in 1974. This was followed by states establishing their own state level boards
to address all the environmental concerns. They investigate, collect and
disseminate information relating to water, air and land pollution, lay down
standards for sewage/trade effluent and emissions. These boards provide
technical assistance to governments in promoting cleanliness of streams and
wells by prevention, control and abatement of water pollution, and improve
the quality of air and to prevent, control or abate air pollution in the country.
These boards also carry out and sponsor investigation and research
relating to problems of water and air pollution and for their prevention, control
or abatement. They organise, through mass media, a comprehensive mass
awareness programme for the same. The PCBs prepare manuals, codes and
guidelines relating to treatment and disposal of sewage and trade effluents.
They assess the air quality through regulation of industries. In fact, state
boards, through their district level officials, periodically inspect every industry
under their jurisdiction to assess the adequacy of treatment measures provided
to treat the effluent and gaseous emissions. It also provides background air
quality data needed for industrial siting and town planning.
The pollution control boards collect, collate and disseminate technical and
statistical data relating to water pollution. They monitor the quality of water
in 125 rivers (including the tributaries), wells, lakes, creeks, ponds, tanks,
drains and canals.
Ø Visit a nearby factory/irrigation department and collect the details of
measures that they adopt to control water and air pollution.
Ø You might be seeing advertisements in newspapers, radio and television
or billboards in your locality on awareness programmes relating to water
and air pollution. Collect a few news-clippings, pamphlets and other
information and discuss them in the classroom.

In India, air pollution is widespread
in urban areas where vehicles are the
major contributors and in a few other
areas which have a high concentration
of industries and thermal power plants.
Vehicular emissions are of particular
concern since these are ground level
sources and, thus, have the maximum
impact on the general population. The
number of motor vehicles has increased
from about 3 lakh in 1951 to 30 crores
in 2019. In 2016, personal transport

vehicles (two-wheeled vehicles and cars
only) constituted about 85 per cent of
the total number of registered vehicles
thus contributing significantly to total
air pollution load.
India is one of the ten most
industrialised nations of the world.
But this status has brought with
it unwanted and unanticipated
consequences such as unplanned
urbanisation, pollution and the risk of
accidents. The CPCB (Central Pollution

ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

123

Control Board) has identified seventeen
categories of industries (large
and medium scale) as significantly
polluting (See Box 7.4).
Work This Out

Ø You can see a column on the
measure of air pollution in
any national daily. Cut out
the news item a week before
Diwali, on the day of Diwali
and two days after Diwali.
Do you observe a significant
difference in the value?
Discuss in your class.

The above points highlight the
challenges to India’s environment. The
various measures adopted by the
Ministry of Environment and the
central and state pollution control
boards may not yield reward unless
we consciously adopt a path of
sustainable development. The concern
for future generations alone can make
development last forever. Development
to enhance our current living styles,
without concern for posterity, will
deplete resources and degrade
environment at a pace that is bound to
result in both environmental and
economic crisis.

7.4 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Environment and economy are
interdependent and need each other.
Hence, development that ignores its
repercussions on the environment will
destroy the environment that sustains
life forms. What is needed is sustainable
development: development that will
124

allow all future generations to have a
potential average quality of life that is
at least as high as that which is being
enjoyed by the current generation. The
concept of sustainable development
was emphasised by the United Nations
Conference on Environment and
Development (UNCED), which defined
it as: ‘Development that meets the need
of the present generation without
compromising the ability of the future
generation to meet their own needs’.
Read the definition again. You will
notice that the term ‘need’ and the
phrase ‘future generations’ in the
definition are the catch phrases. The
use of the concept ‘needs’ in the
definition is linked to distribution of
resources. The seminal report — Our
Common Future — that gave the above
definition explained sustainable
development as ‘meeting the basic
needs of all and extending to all the
opportunity to satisfy their aspirations
for a better life’. Meeting the needs of
all requires redistributing resources
and is hence a moral issue.
Edward Barbier defined sustainable
development as one which is directly
concerned with increasing the material
standard of living of the poor at
the grass root level — this can be
quantitatively measured in terms of
increased income, real income,
educational services, health care,
sanitation, water supply etc. In more
specific terms, sustainable development
aims at decreasing the absolute poverty
of the poor by providing lasting and
secure livelihoods that minimise
resource depletion, environmental
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

degradation, cultural disruption and
social instability. Sustainable
development is, in this sense, a
development that meets the basic needs
of all, particularly the poor majority, for
employment, food, energy, water,
housing, and ensures growth of
agriculture, manufacturing, power and
services to meet these needs.
The Brundtland Commission
emphasises on protecting the future
generation. This is in line with the
argument of the environmentalists who
emphasise that we have a moral
obligation to hand over the planet earth
in good order to the future generation;
that is, the present generation should
bequeath a better environment to the
future generation. At least we should
leave to the next generation a stock of
‘quality of life’ assets no less than what
we have inherited.
The present generation can
promote development that enhances
the natural and built environment in
ways that are compatible with
(i) conservation of natural assets
(ii) preservation of the regenerative
capacity of the world’s natural
ecological system (iii) avoiding the
imposition of added costs or risks on
future generations.
According to Herman Daly, a leading
environmental economist, to achieve
sustainable development, the following
needs to be done (i) limiting the human
population to a level within the carrying
capacity of the environment. The carrying
capacity of the environment is like
a‘plimsoll line’ of the ship which is its load
limit mark. In the absence of the plimsoll
line for the economy, human scale grows

beyond the carrying capacity of the earth
and deviates from sustainable
development (ii) technological progress
should be input efficient and not input
consuming (iii) renewable resources
should be extracted on a sustainable basis,
that is, rate of extraction should not exceed
rate of regeneration (iv) for non-renewable
resources rate of depletion should not
exceed the rate of creation of renewable
substitutes and (v) inefficiencies arising
from pollution should be corrected. In
2015, the UN formulated 17 Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) intended to be
achieved by the year 2030. Collect the
details of those goals and discuss them in
the context of India.

7.5 S TRATEGIES FOR S USTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT
Use of Non-conventional Sources of
Energy: India, as you know, is hugely
dependent on thermal and hydro
power plants to meet its power
needs. Both of these have adverse
environmental impacts. Thermal power
plants emit large quantities of carbon
dioxide which is a green house gas. It
also produces fly ash which, if not used
properly, can cause pollution of water
bodies, land and other components of
the environment. Hydroelectric projects
inundate forests and interfere with the
natural flow of water in catchment
areas and the river basins. Wind power
and solar rays are good examples of
conventional. In recent years, some
efforts are being taken to tap these
energy resources. Collect the details
of one such unit set up in your area if
any, and discuss in the class.

ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

125

LPG, Gobar Gas in Rural Areas:
Households in rural areas generally use
wood, dung cake or other biomass as
fuel. This practice has several adverse
implications like deforestation,
reduction in green cover, wastage of
cattle dung and air pollution. To rectify
the situation, subsidised LPG is being
provided. In addition, gobar gas plants
are being provided through easy loans
and subsidy. As far as liquefied
petroleum gas (LPG) is concerned, it is
a clean fuel — it reduces household
pollution to a large extent. Also, energy
wastage is minimised. For the gobar
gas plant to function, cattle dung is fed
to the plant and gas is produced which
is used as fuel while the slurry which
is left over is a very good organic
fertiliser and soil conditioner.
CNG in Urban Areas: In Delhi, the use
of Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) as
fuel in public transport system has
significantly lowered air pollution and
the air has become cleaner. In the last

Work This Out

Ø In Delhi, buses and other public
transport vehicles uses CNG as fuel
instead of petrol or diesel; some
vehicles use convertible engines;
solar energy is being used to light
up the streets. What do you think
about these changes? Delhi also
adopted odd/even scheme to restrict
the use of vehicles with registration
ending with odd/even numbers on
alternative days, for specific period
in a year. Organise a debate in class
on the need for sustainable
development practices in India.

few years many other Indian cities also
began to use CNG.
Wind Power: In areas where speed of
wind is usually high, wind mills can
provide electricity without any adverse
impact on the environment. Wind
turbines move with the wind and
electricity is generated. No doubt, the
initial cost is high. But the benefits are
such that the high cost gets easily
absorbed.

Fig.7.4 Gobar Gas Plant uses cattle dung to produce energy

126

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Solar Power through Photovoltaic
Cells: India is naturally endowed with
a large quantity of solar energy in the
form of sunlight. We use it in different
ways. For example, we dry our clothes,
grains, other agricultural products as
well as various items made for daily use.
We also use sunlight to warm ourselves
in winter. Plants use solar energy to
perform photosynthesis. Now, with the
help of photovoltaic cells, solar energy
can be converted into electricity. These
cells use special kind of materials to
capture solar energy and then convert
the energy into electricity. This
technology is extremely useful for remote
areas and for places where supply of
power through grid or power lines is
either not possible or proves very costly.
This technique is also totally free from
pollution. In recent years India is taking
efforts to increase the power generation
through solar. India is also leading an
International body called International
Solar Alliance (ISA).
Mini-hydel Plants: In mountainous
regions, streams can be found almost
everywhere. A large percentage of such
streams are perennial. Mini-hydel
plants use the energy of such streams
to move small turbines. The turbines
generate electricity which can be used
locally. Such power plants are more or
less environment-friendly as they do not
change the land use pattern in areas
where they are located; they generate
enough power to meet local demands.
This means that they can also do away
with the need for large scale
transmission towers and cables and
avoid transmission loss.

Traditional
Knowledge
and
Practices: Traditionally, Indian people
have been close to their environment.
They have been more a component of
the environment and not its controller.
If we look back at our agriculture
system, healthcare system, housing,
transport etc., we find that all practices
have been environment friendly. Only
recently have we drifted away from the
traditional systems and caused large
scale damage to the environment and
also our rural heritage. Now, it is time
to go back. One apt example is in
healthcare. India is very much
privileged to have about 15,000 species
of plants which have medicinal
properties. About 8,000 of these are in
regular use in various systems of
treatment including the folk tradition.
With the sudden onslaught of the
western system of treatment, we
ignored our traditional systems such
as Ayurveda, Unani, Tibetan and folk
systems. These healthcare systems are
in great demand again for treating
chronic health problems. Now a days
every cosmetic produce — hair oil,
toothpaste, body lotion, face cream and
what not — is herbal in composition.
Not only are these products environment
friendly, they are relatively free from side
effects and do not involve large-scale
industrial and chemical processing.
Biocomposting: In our quest to
increase agricultural production
during the last five decades or so, we
almost totally neglected the use of
compost and completely switched over
to chemical fertilisers. The result is that
large tracts of productive land have

ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

127

been adversely affected, water bodies
including ground water system have
suffered due to chemical contamination
and demand for irrigation has been
going up year after year.
Farmers, in large numbers all over
the country, have again started using
compost made from organic wastes of
different types. In certain parts of the
country, cattle are maintained only
because they produce dung which is
an important fertiliser and soil
conditioner.
Earthworms can convert organic
matter into compost faster than the
normal composting process. This
process is now being widely used.
Indirectly, the civic authorities are
benefited too as they have to dispose
reduced quantity of waste.
Biopest Control: With the advent of
green revolution, the entire country
entered into a frenzy to use more and
more chemical pesticides for higher
yield. Soon, the adverse impacts began
to show; food products were
contaminated, soil, water bodies and
even ground water were polluted with
pesticides. Even milk, meat and fishes
were found to be contaminated.
To meet this challenge, efforts are
on to bring in better methods of pest
control. One such step is the use of
pesticides based on plant products.
Neem trees are proving to be quite
useful. Several types of pest controlling
chemicals have been isolated from neem
and these are being used. Mixed
cropping and growing different crops
in consecutive years on the same land
have also helped farmers.
128

In addition, awareness is spreading
about various animals and birds which
help in controlling pests. For example,
snakes are one of the prime group of
animals which prey upon rats, mice and
various other pests. Similarly, large
varieties of birds, for example, owls and
peacocks, prey upon vermin and pests.
If these are allowed to dwell around the
agricultural areas, they can clear large
varieties of pests including insects.
Lizards are also important in this
regard. We need to know their value and
save them.
Sustainable development has
become a catch phrase today. It is
‘indeed’ a paradigm shift in
development thinking. Though it has
been interpreted in a number of ways,
adherence to this path ensures lasting
development and non-declining welfare
for all.

7.6 CONCLUSION
Economic development, which aimed at
increasing the production of goods and
services to meet the needs of a rising
population, puts greater pressure on
the environment. In the initial stages
of development, the demand for
environmental resources was less than
that of supply. Now the world is
faced with increased demand for
environmental resources but their
supply is limited due to overuse and
misuse. Sustainable development aims
at promoting the kind of development
that minimises environmental problems
and meets the needs of the present
generation without compromising the
ability of the future generation to meet
their own needs.
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Recap
Ø Environment performs four functions: supplies resources, assimilates
wastes, sustains life by providing genetic and bio diversity and provides
aesthetic services.
Ø Population explosion, affluent consumption and production have placed
a huge stress on the environment.
Ø Developmental activities in India have put immense pressure on its finite
natural resources, besides creating impact on human health and
well-being.
Ø The threat to India’s environment is of two dimensions — threat of poverty
induced environmental degradation and the threat of pollution from
affluence and a rapidly growing industrial sector.
Ø Though the government, through various measures, attempts to safeguard
the environment, it is also necessary to adopt a path of sustainable
development.
Ø Sustainable development is development that meets the need of the present
generation without compromising the ability of the future generation to
meet their own needs.
Ø Promotion of natural resources, conservation, preserving regenerative
capacity of ecological system and avoiding the imposition of environmental
risks on future generations would lead to sustainable development.

EXERCISES

1. What is meant by environment?
2. What happens when the rate of resource extraction exceeds that of
their regeneration?
3. Classify the following into renewable and non-renewable resources
(i) trees (ii) fish (iii) petroleum (iv) coal (v) iron-ore (vi) water.
4. Two major environmental issues facing the world today are ____________
and _____________.
5. How do the following factors contribute to the environmental crisis
in India? What problem do they pose for the government?
(i) Rising population
(ii) Air pollution
ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

129

(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)
(ix)
(x)

Water contamination
Affluent consumption standards
Illiteracy
Industrialisation
Urbanisation
Reduction of forest coverage
Poaching, and
Global warming.

6. What are the functions of the environment?
7. Identify six factors contributing to land degradation in India.
8. Explain how the opportunity costs of negative environmental impact
are high.
9. Outline the steps involved in attaining sustainable development in India.
10. India has abundant natural resources — substantiate the statement.
11. Is environmental crisis a recent phenomenon? If so, why?
12. Give two instances of
(a) Overuse of environmental resources
(b) Misuse of environmental resources.
13. State any four pressing environmental concerns of India.
14. Correction for environmental damages involves opportunity
costs — explain.
15. Explain how the supply-demand reversal of environmental resources
account for the current environmental crisis.
16. Highlight any two serious adverse environmental consequences of
development in India. India’s environmental problems pose a dichotomy
— they are poverty induced and, at the same time, due to affluence in
living standards — is this true?
17. What is sustainable development?
18. Keeping in view your locality, describe any four strategies of sustainable
development.
19. Explain the relevance of intergenerational equity in the definition of
sustainable development.
SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES
1. Suppose 70 lakh cars are added every year to the roads of metropolitans.
Which type of resources do you think are undergoing depletion? Discuss.
2. Make a list of items that can be recycled.

130

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

3. Prepare a chart on the causes and remedies of soil erosion in India.
4. How does population explosion contribute to the environmental crisis?
Debate in the classroom.
5. The nation has to pay heavily for correcting environmental damages —
discuss.
6. A paper factory is to be set up in your village. Arrange a role play
consisting of an activist, an industrialist and a group of villagers.

REFERENCES

BOOKS
AGARWAL, ANIL and SUNITA NARAIN. 1996. Global Warming in an Unequal World.
Centre for Science and Environment, Reprint Edition, New Delhi.
BHARUCHA, E. 2005. Textbook of Environmental Studies for Undergraduate
Courses, Universities Press (India) Pvt Ltd.
CENTRE FOR SCIENCE AND ENVIRONMENT. 1996. State of India’s Environment
1: The First Citizens’ Report 1982. Reprint Edition, New Delhi.
CENTRE FOR SCIENCE AND ENVIRONMENT. 1996. State of India’s Environment
2: The Second Citizens’ Report 1985, Reprint Edition, New Delhi.
KARPAGAM, M. 2001.Environmental Economics: A Textbook. Sterling Publishers,
New Delhi.
RAJAGOPALAN, R. 2005. Environmental Studies: From Crisis to Cure. Oxford
University Press, New Delhi.
SCHUMACHER, E.F. Small is Beautiful. Abacus Publishers, New York.
Reports
State of India’s Environment (for various years), Centre for Science and
Environment, New Delhi.
Journals
Scientific American, India, Special Issue, September 2005
Down to Earth, Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi.
Websites
http://envfor.nic.in
http://cpcb.nic.in
http://www.cseindia.org
ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

131

UNIT
UNIT

IV
III

DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA: A COMPARISON
WITH NEIGHBOURS

In today’s globalised world, where geographical
boundaries are slowly becoming meaningless, it
is important for neighbouring countries in the
developing world to understand the development
strategies being pursued by their neighbours. This
is more so because they share the relatively limited
economic space in world markets. In this unit, we
will compare India’s developmental experiences
with two of its important and strategic neighbours
— Pakistan and China.

8

COMPARATIVE
DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA
AND ITS NEIGHBOURS

After studying this chapter, the learners will
figure out comparative trends in various economic and human
development indicators of India and its neighbours, China and Pakistan
• assess the strategies that these countries have adopted to reach their
present state of development.
•

134

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Geography has made us neighbours. History has made us friends. Economics
has made us partners, and necessity has made us allies. Those whom God has
so joined together, let no man put asunder.
John F. Kennedy

8.1 INTRODUCTION
In the preceding units we studied the
developmental experience of India in
detail. We also studied the kind of
policies India adopted, which had
varying impacts in different sectors.
Over the last two decades or so, the
economic transformation that is taking
place in different countries across the
world, partly because of the process
of globalisation, has both short as
well as long-term implications for
each country, including India. Nations
have been primarily trying to adopt
various means which will strengthen
their own domestic economies. To this
effect, they are forming regional and
global economic groupings such as
the SAARC, European Union,
ASEAN, G-8, G-20, BRICS etc. In
addition, there is also an increasing
eagerness on the parts of various
nations to try and understand the
developmental processes pursued by
their neighbouring nations as it
allows them to better comprehend
their own strengths and weaknesses
vis-à-vis their neighbours. In the
unfolding process of globalisation,
this is particularly considered
essential by developing countries as
they face competition not only from
developed nations but also amongst
themselves in the relatively limited
economic space enjoyed by the
developing world. Besides, an

understanding of the other economies
in our neighbourhood is also required
as all major common economic
activities in the region impinge on
overall human development in a
shared environment.
In this chapter we will compare the
developmental strategies pursued by
India and the largest two of its
neighbouring economies—Pakistan
and China. It has to be remembered
that despite being endowed with vast
natural resources, there is little
similarity between the political power
setup of India - the largest democracy
of the world which is wedded to a
secular and deeply liberal Constitution
for more than half a century, and the
militarist political power structure of
Pakistan or the command economy
of China that has only recently
started moving towards a democratic
system and more liberal economic
restructuring respectively.

8.2

DEVELOPMENTAL
SNAPSHOT VIEW

P A T H —A

Do you know that India, Pakistan and
China have many similarities in their
developmental strategies? All the three
nations have started towards their
developmental path at the same time.
While India and Pakistan became
independent nations in 1947, People’s
Republic of China was established in
1949. In a speech at that time,

COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS

135

Jawaharlal Nehru had said, “These
new and revolutionary changes in
China and India, even though they
differ in content, symbolise the new
spirit of Asia and new vitality which is
finding expression in the countries in
Asia.”
All three countries had started
planning their development strategies
in similar ways. While India
announced its first Five Year Plan for
1951–56, Pakistan announced its first
five year plan, now called the Medium
Term Development Plan, in 1956.
China announced its First Five Year
Plan in 1953. Since 2018, Pakistan is
working on the basis of 12th Five Year
Development Plan (2018–23), whereas,
China is working on 14th Five Year
Plan (2021–25). Until March 2017,
India has been following Five Year
Plan- based development model. India
and Pakistan adopted similar
strategies, such as creating a large
public sector and raising public
expenditure on social development.
Till the 1980s, all the three countries
had similar growth rates and per capita
incomes. Where do they stand today
in comparison to one another? Before
we answer this question, let us trace
the historical path of developmental
policies in China and Pakistan. After
studying the last three units, we
already know what policies India has
been adopting since its Independence.
China: After the establishment of
People’s Republic of China under oneparty rule, all critical sectors of the
economy, enterprises and lands owned
and operated by individuals were
brought under government control.
136

The Great Leap Forward (GLF)
campaign initiated in 1958 aimed at
industrialising the country on a
massive scale. People were encouraged
to set up industries in their backyards.
In rural areas, communes were
started. Under the Commune system,
people collectively cultivated lands. In
1958, there were 26,000 communes
covering almost all the farm
population.
GLF campaign met with many
problems. A severe drought caused
havoc in China killing about 30 million
people. When Russia had conflicts with
China, it withdrew its professionals
who had earlier been sent to China to
help in the industrialisation process.
In 1965, Mao introduced the Great
Proletarian Cultural Revolution
(1966–76) under which students and
professionals were sent to work and
learn from the countryside.
The present day fast industrial
growth in China can be traced back to
the reforms introduced in 1978. China
introduced reforms in phases. In the
initial phase, reforms were initiated in
agriculture, foreign trade and
investment sectors. In agriculture, for
instance, commune lands were divided
into small plots, which were allocated
(for use not ownership) to individual
households. They were allowed to keep
all income from the land after paying
stipulated taxes. In the later phase,
reforms were initiated in the industrial
sector. Private sector firms, in general,
and township and village enterprises,
i.e., those enterprises which were
owned and operated by local collectives,
in particular, were allowed to produce
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Fig. 8.1 Wagah Border is not only a tourist place but also used for
trade between India and Pakistan

goods. At this stage, enterprises owned
by government (known as State Owned
Enterprises—SOEs), which we, in
India, call public sector enterprises,
were made to face competition. The
reform process also involved dual
pricing. This means fixing the prices in
two ways; farmers and industrial units
were required to buy and sell fixed
quantities of inputs and outputs on the
basis of prices fixed by the government
and the rest were purchased and sold
at market prices. Over the years, as
production increased, the proportion of
goods or inputs transacted in the
market also increased. In order to
attract foreign investors, special
economic zones were set up.
Pakistan: While looking at various
economic policies that Pakistan
adopted, you will notice many
similarities with India. Pakistan also
follows the mixed economy model with

co-existence of public and private
sectors. In the late 1950s and 1960s,
Pakistan introduced a variety of
regulated policy framework (for import
substitution-based industrialisation).
The policy combined tariff protection for
manufacturing of consumer goods
together with direct import controls on
competing imports. The introduction of
Green Revolution led to mechanisation
and increase in public investment in
infrastructure in select areas, which
finally led to a rise in the production of
foodgrains. This changed the agrarian
structure dramatically. In the 1970s,
nationalisation of capital goods
industries took place. Pakistan then
shifted its policy orientation in the late
1970s and 1980s when the major
thrust areas were denationalisation
and encouragement of private sector.
During this period, Pakistan also
received financial support from western
nations and remittances from

COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS

137

continuously increasing outflow of
emigrants to the Middle-east. This
helped the country in stimulating
economic growth. The then government
also offered incentives to the private
sector. All this created a conducive
climate for new investments. In 1988,
reforms were initiated in the country.
Having studied a brief outline of
the developmental strategies of China
and Pakistan, let us now compare
some of the developmental indicators
of India, China and Pakistan.

8.3 DEMOGRAPHIC INDICATORS
If we look at the global population, out
of every six persons living in this
world, one is an Indian and another a
Chinese. We shall compare some
demographic indicators of India,
China and Pakistan. The population
of Pakistan is very small and accounts
for roughly about one-tenth of China
or India.
Though China is the largest nation
and geographically occupies the largest
area among the three nations, its
density is the lowest. Table 8.1 shows

the population growth as being the
highest in Pakistan, followed by India
and China. Scholars point out the onechild norm introduced in China in the
late 1970s as the major reason for low
population growth. They also state that
this measure led to a decline in the sex
ratio, the proportion of females per
1000 males. However, from the table,
you will notice that the sex ratio is low
and biased against females in all three
countries. Scholars cite son preference
prevailing in all these countries as the
reason. In recent times, all three
countries are adopting various
measures to improve the situation. Onechild norm and the resultant arrest in
the growth of population also have other
implications. For instance, after a few
decades, in China, there will be more
elderly people in proportion to young
people. This led China to allow couples
to have two children.
The fertility rate is also low in
China and very high in Pakistan.
Urbanisation is high in China with
India having 34 per cent of its people
living in urban areas.

TABLE 8.1
Select Demographic Indicators, 2017-18
Country

Estimated
Population
(in million)

Annual
Growth of
Population

Density
(per sq. km)

Sex
Ratio

Fertility
Rate

Urbanisation

India

1352

1.03

455

924

2.2

34

China

1393

0.46

148

949

1.7

59

Pakistan

212

2.05

275

943

3.6

37

Source: World Development Indicators 2019, www.worldbank.org

138

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

8.4 G ROSS D OMESTIC
PRODUCT
AND
SECTORS

(Not to scale)

One of the much-talked
issues around the world
about China is its growth
of Gross Domestic
Product. China has the
second largest GDP (PPP)
of $22.5 trillion in the
world, whereas, India’s
GDP (PPP) is $9.03
trillion and Pakistan’s
GDP is $ 0.94 trillion,
roughly about 11 per
cent of India’s GDP.
India’s GDP is about 41
Fig. 8.2 Land use and agriculture in India, China and Pakistan
per cent of China’s GDP.
When many developed countries
TABLE 8.2
were finding it difficult to maintain a
Annual Growth of Gross Domestic
growth rate of even 5 per cent, China
Product (%), 1980–2017
was able to maintain near double-digit
Country
1980–90
2015–2017
growth during 1980s as can be seen
India
5.7
7.3
from Table 8.2. Also, notice that in the
China
10.3
6.8
1980s, Pakistan was ahead of India;
China was having double-digit growth
Pakistan
6.3
5.3
and India was at the bottom. In 2015–17,
Source: Key Indicators for Asia and Pacific 2016,
Asian Development Bank, Philippines; World
there has been a decline in Pakistan
Development Indicators 2018

Work These Out

Ø Does India follow any population stabilisation measures? If so, collect the
details and discuss in the classroom. You may refer to the latest Economic
Survey, annual reports or website of the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare (http://mohfw.nic.in).

Ø Scholars find son preference as a common phenomenon in many developing
countries, including India, China and Pakistan. Do you find this phenomenon
in your family or neighbourhood? Why do people practise discrimination
between male and female children? What do you think about it? Discuss it
in the classroom.
COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS

139

Pakistan have more
proportion
of
urban population than
India. In China, due to
topographic and climatic
conditions, the area
suitable for cultivation is
relatively small — only
about 10 per cent of its
total land area. The total
cultivable area in China
accounts for 40 per cent
of the cultivable area in
India. Until the 1980s,
more than 80 per cent of
the people in China were
dependent on farming
as their sole source
of livelihood. Since
then, the government
encouraged
people
to leave their fields
and pursue other
activities such as
Fig. 8.3 Industry in India, China and Pakistan
handicrafts, commerce
and transport. In 2018–
19, with 26 per cent of its workforce
and China’s growth rates, whereas,
engaged in agriculture, its contribution
India met with moderate increase in
to the GVA in China is 7 per cent (see
growth rates. Some scholars hold the
Table 8.3).
reform processes introduced in
In both India and Pakistan, the
Pakistan and political instability over
contribution
of agriculture to GVA were
a long period as reasons behind the
16 and 24 per cent, respectively, but
declining growth rate in Pakistan. We
the proportion of workforce that works
will study in a later section which
in this sector is more in India. In
sector contributed to different growth
Pakistan, about 41 per cent of people
rates in these countries.
work in agriculture, whereas, in India,
First, look at how people engaged in
it is 43 per cent. Twenty four per cent
different sectors contribute to the Gross
of Pakistan workforce is engaged in
Domestic Product now called as Gross
industry but it produces 19 per cent
Value Added. It was pointed out in the
of GVA. In India, industry workforce
previous section that China and
(Not to scale)

140

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

TABLE 8.3
Sectoral Share of Employment and GVA (%) in 2018–2019
Sector

Contribution to GVA

Distribution of Workforce

Agriculture

India
16

China
7

Pakistan
24

India
43

China
26

Pakistan
41

Industry

30

41

19

25

28

24

Services

54

52

57

32

46

35

Total

100

100

100

100

100

100

Source: Human Development Report 2019 ; Key Indicators of Asia and Pacific 2019.

account for 25 per cent but produces
goods worth 30 per cent of GVA. In
China, industries contribute to GVA at
41, and employ 28 per cent of
workforce. In all the three countries,
service sector contributes highest share
of GVA.
In the normal course of
development, countries first shift their
employment and output from
agriculture to Industry and then to
services. This is what is happening in
China as can be seen from Table 8.3.
The proportion of workforce engaged
in industry in India and Pakistan were
low at 25 per cent and 24 per cent
respectively. The contribution of
industries to GVA is at 30 per cent in
India and 19 per cent in Pakistan. In
these countries, the shift is taking place
directly to the service sector.
Thus, in all the three countries the
service sector is emerging as a major
player of development. It contributes
more to GVA and, at the same time,
emerges as a prospective employer. If
we look at the proportion of workforce
in the1980s, Pakistan was faster in
shifting its workforce to service sector
than India and China. In the 1980s,

India, China and Pakistan employed
17, 12 and 27 per cent of its workforce
in the service sector respectively. In
2019, it has reached the level of 32,
46 and 35 per cent, respectively.
In the last five decades, the
growth of agriculture sector, which
employs the largest proportion of
workforce in all the three countries, has
declined. In the industrial sector, China
has maintained a near double-digit
growth rate in 1980s but began
showing decline in recent years,

Work These Out

Ø Do you think it is necessary
for India and Pakistan to
concentrate on t h e manufacturing sector as China
does? Why?

Ø Scholars argue that the
service sector should not be
considered as an engine of
growth whereas India and
Pakistan have raised their
share of output mainly in
this sector only. What do
you think?

COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS

141

TABLE 8.4
Trends in Output Growth in Different Sectors, 1980–2015
Country

2014–18

1980–90
Agriculture

Industry

Service

Agriculture

Industry

Service

India

3.1

7.4

6.9

3.1

6.9

7.6

China

5.9

10.8

13.5

3.1

5.3

7.1

Pakistan

4

7.7

6.8

1.7

4.8

5.0

whereas, for India and Pakistan growth
rate has declined. In case of service
sector, China was able to maintain its
rate of growth during 1980–1990,while
there was a positive and increasing
growth of India’s service sector output.
Thus, China’s growth is contributed
by the manufacturing and service
sectors and India’s growth by the
service sector. During this period,
Pakistan has shown deceleration in all
three sectors.

8.5

INDICATORS OF HUMAN
DEVELOPMENT

You might have studied about the
importance of human development
indicators in the lower classes and the
position of many developed and
developing countries. Let us look how
India, China and Pakistan have
performed in some of the select
indicators of human development.
Look at Table 8.5.

TABLE 8.5
Some Selected Indicators of Human Development, 2017-2019
Item

India

China

Pakistan

Human Development Index (Value)

0.645

0.761

0.557

Rank (based on HDI)

130

87

154

Life Expectancy at Birth (years)

69.7

76.9

67.3

Mean years of Schooling (% aged 15 and above)

6.5

8.1

5.2

Gross National Income per capita (PPP US$)

6,681

16,057

5,005

Percentage of People living Below Poverty Line (National)

21.9*

1.7**

24.3*

Infant Mortality Rate (per 1000 live births)

29.9

7.4

57.2

Maternal Mortality Rate (per 1 lakh births)

133

29

140

Population using at least basic Sanitation (%)

60

75

60

Population using at least basic drinking
Water Source (%)

93

96

91

Percentage of Undernourished Children

37.9

8.1

37.6

Note: * for the year 2011; for the years 2015.
Sources: Human Development Report 2019 and 2020 and World Development Indicators
(www.worldbank.org); Key indicators for Asia and the Pacific 2019, Asian Development Bank (ADB).
142

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Table 8.5 shows that China is
moving ahead of India and Pakistan.
This is true for many indicators —
income indicator such as GDP per
capita, or proportion of population
below poverty line or health indicators
such as mortality rates, access to
sanitation, literacy, life expectancy or
malnourishment. China and Pakistan
are ahead of India in reducing
proportion of people below the poverty
line and also their performance in
sanitation. But India and Pakistan
have not been able to save women from
maternal mortality. In China, for one
lakh births, only 29 women die
whereas in India and Pakistan, about
133 and 140 women die respectively.
Surprisingly all the three countries
report providing improved drinking
water sources for most of its
population. China has the smallest
share of poor among the three
countries. Find out for yourself how
these differences occur.
In dealing with or making
judgements on such questions,
however, we should also note a problem
while using the human development
indicators given above with conviction.
This occurs because these are all
extremely important indicators; but
these are not sufficient. Along with
these, we also need what may be called
‘liberty indicators’. One such indicator
has actually been added as a measure
of ‘the extent of democratic
participation in social and political
decision-making’ but it has not been
given any extra weight. Some obvious
‘liberty indicators’ like measures of ‘the

extent of Constitutional protection
given to rights of citizens’ or ‘the extent
of constitutional protection of
the Independence of the Judiciary and
the Rule of Law’ have not even
been introduced so far. Without
including these (and perhaps some
more) and giving them overriding
importance in the list, the construction
of a human development index may
be said to be incomplete and its
usefulness limited.

8.6 DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIES — AN
APPRAISAL
It is common to find developmental
strategies of a country as a model to
others for lessons and guidance for
their own development. It is particularly
evident after the introduction of the
reform process in different parts of the
world. In order to learn from economic
performance of our neighbouring
countries, it is necessary to have an
understanding of the roots of their
successes and failures. It is also
necessary to distinguish between, and
contrast, the different phases of their
strategies. Though countries go
through their development phases
differently, let us take the initiation of
reforms as a point of reference. We
know that reforms were initiated in
China in 1978, Pakistan in 1988 and
India in 1991. Let us briefly assess their
achievements and failures in pre- and
post-reform periods.
Why did China introduce
structural reforms in 1978? China did
not have any compulsion to introduce

COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS

143

reforms as dictated by the World Bank
and International Monetary Fund to
India and Pakistan. The new
leadership at that time in China was
not happy with the slow pace of growth
and lack of modernisation in the
Chinese economy under the Maoist
rule. They felt that Maoist vision of
economic development based on
decentralisation, self sufficiency and
shunning of foreign technology, goods
and capital had failed. Despite
extensive land reforms, collectivisation,
the Great Leap Forward and other
initiatives, the per capita grain output
in 1978 was the same as it was in the
mid-1950s.
It was found that establishment of
infrastructure in the areas of
education and health, land reforms,
long existence of decentralised
planning and existence of small
enterprises had helped positively in
improving the social and income
indicators in the post reform period.
Before the introduction of reforms,
there had already been massive
extension of basic health services in
rural areas. Through the commune
system, there was more equitable
distribution of food grains. Experts
also point out that each reform
measure was first implemented at a
smaller level and then extended on a
massive scale. The experimentation
under decentralised government
enabled to assess the economic, social
and political costs of success or failure.
For instance, when reforms were made
in agriculture, as pointed out earlier
144

by handing over plots of land to
individuals for cultivation, it brought
prosperity to a vast number of poor
people. It created conditions for the
subsequent phenomenal growth in
rural industries and built up a strong
support base for more reforms.
Scholars quote many such examples
on how reform measures led to rapid
growth in China.
Scholars argue that in Pakistan
the reform process led to worsening of
all the economic indicators. We have
seen in an earlier section that
compared to 1980s, the growth rate
of GDP and its sectoral constituents
have not yet improved.
Though the data on international
poverty line for Pakistan is quite
healthy, scholars using the official
data of Pakistan indicate rising
poverty there. The proportion of poor
in 1960s was more than 40 per cent
which declined to 25 per cent in 1980s
and started rising again in the recent
decades. The reasons for the slowdown of growth and re-emergence of
poverty in Pakistan’s economy, as
scholars put it, are agricultural growth
and food supply situation were based
not on an institutionalised process of
technical change but on good harvest.
When there was a good harvest, the
economy was in good condition, when
it was not, the economic indicators
showed stagnation or negative trends.
You will recall that India had to borrow
from the IMF and World Bank to
set right its balance of payments
crisis; foreign exchange is an essential
component for any country and it is
INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Work These Out

Ø While India has performed relatively well vis-à-vis other developing
countries (including its Asian neighbours) in terms of economic growth,
India is yet to show the world that there is considerable progress in terms
of human development indicators. Where India went wrong ? Why did we
not take care of our human resources? Discuss in the classroom.

Ø There is a general perception going around in India that there is sudden
increase in dumping of Chinese goods into India which have implications
for manufacturing sector in India and also that we do not engage
ourselves in trading with our neighbouring nations. Look at the following
table, which shows exports from India to, and imports from, Pakistan
and China. From newspapers and websites and listening to news, collect
the details of goods and services transacted in trading with our
neighbours. In order to get detailed information relating to international
trade, you can log on to the website: http://dgft.gov.in.
Country

Exports from India ( Rs in crore)

Imports to India (Rs in crore)

2004-2005

2018-2019

Annual
2004-2005 2018-2019
Rate of
Growth (%)

Annual
Rate of
Growth (%)

Pakistan

2,341

14,426

3.7

427

3476

5.1

China

25,232

1,17,289

2.6

31,892

4,92,079

10.3

Ø Calculate exports as a % of imports for both the years and discuss the
probable reasons for the trend in the class.

COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS

145

important to know how it can be
earned. If a country is able to build up
its foreign exchange earnings by
sustainable export of manufactured
goods, it need not worry. In Pakistan
most foreign exchange earnings came
from remittances from Pakistani
workers in the Middle-east and the
exports of highly volatile agricultural
products; there was also growing
dependence on foreign loans on the one
hand and increasing difficulty in paying
back the loans on the other.
However, during the last few years,
Pakistan has recovered its economic
growth and has been sustaining. In
2017-18, the Annual Plan 2019-20
reports that, the GDP registered a
growth of 5.5 per cent, highest when
compared to the previous decade. While
agriculture recorded growth rate far
from satisfactory level, industrial and
service sectors grew at 4.9 and 6.2 per
cent respectively. Many macroeconomic
indicators also began to show stable
and positive trends.

8.7 CONCLUSION
What are we learning from the
developmental experiences of our
neighbours? India, China and
Pakistan have travelled seven decades
of developmental path with varied
results. Till the late 1970s, all of them
were maintaining the same level of low
development. The last three decades
have taken these countries to different

146

levels. India, with democratic
institutions, performed moderately,
but a majority of its people still depend
on agriculture. India has taken many
initiatives to develop the infrastructure
and improve the standard of living.
Scholars are of the opinion that
political instability, over-dependence
on remittances and foreign aid along
with volatile performance of
agriculture sector are the reasons for
the slowdown of the Pakistan
economy. Yet, last five years, many
macroeconomic indicators began
showing positive and moderate growth
rates reflecting the economic recovery.
In China, the lack of political freedom
and its implications for human rights
are major concerns; yet, in the last four
decades, it used the ‘market system
without losing political commitment’
and succeeded in raising the level of
growth alongwith alleviation of poverty.
You will also notice that unlike India
and Pakistan, which are attempting to
privatise their public sector
enterprises, China has used the
market mechanism to ‘create
additional social and economic
opportunities’. By retaining collective
ownership of land and allowing
individuals to cultivate lands, China
has ensured social security in rural
areas. Public intervention in providing
social infrastructure even prior to
reforms has brought about positive
results in human development
indicators in China.

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Recap

Ø With the unfolding of the globalisation process, developing countries
are keen to understand the developmental processes pursued by their
neighbours as they face competition from developed nations as also
amongst themselves.

Ø India, Pakistan and China have similar physical endowments but
totally different political systems.

Ø All the three countries follow the similar planned pattern of
development. However, the structures established to implement
developmental policies are quite different.

Ø Till the early 1980s, the developmental indicators of all the three
countries, such as growth rates and sectoral contribution towards
national income, were similar.

Ø Reforms were introduced in 1978 in China, in 1988 in Pakistan and in
1991 in India.

Ø China introduced structural reforms on its own initiative while they
were forced upon India and Pakistan by international agencies.

Ø The impact of policy measures were different in these countries — for
instance, one-child norm has arrested the population growth in China
whereas in India and Pakistan, a major change is yet to take place.

Ø Even after seventy years of planned development, majority of the
workforce in all the countries depends on agriculture. The dependency
is greater in India.

Ø Though China has followed the classical development pattern of
gradual shift from agriculture to manufacturing and then to services,
India and Pakistan’s shift has been directly from agriculture to service
sector.

Ø China’s industrial sector has maintained a high growth rate while it
is not so in both India and Pakistan. This led to rapid increase of the
GDP per capita in China than in India and Pakistan.

Ø China is ahead of India and Pakistan on many human development
indicators. However these improvements were attributed not to the
reform process but the strategies that China adopted in the pre-reform
period.

Ø While assessing the developmental indicators, one also has to consider
the liberty indicators.

COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS

147

EXERCISES
1.

Why are regional and economic groupings formed?

2.

What are the various means by which countries are trying to
strengthen their own domestic economies?

3.

What similar developmental strategies have India and Pakistan
followed for their respective developmental paths?

4.

Explain the Great Leap Forward campaign of China as initiated in
1958.

5.

China’s rapid industrial growth can be traced back to its reforms in
1978. Do you agree? Elucidate.

6.

Describe the path of developmental initiatives taken by Pakistan
for its economic development.

7.

What is the important implication of the ‘one child norm’ in China?

8.

Mention the salient demographic indicators of China, Pakistan and
India.

9.

Compare and contrast India and China’s sectoral contribution
towards GVA/GDP. What does it indicate?

10.

Mention the various indicators of human development.

11.

Define the liberty indicator. Give some examples of liberty indicators.

12.

Evaluate the various factors that led to the rapid growth in economic
development in China.

13.

Group the following features pertaining to the economies of India,
China and Pakistan under three heads

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
148

One-child norm
Low fertility rate
High degree of urbanisation
Mixed economy
Very high fertility rate
Large population
High density of population
Growth due to manufacturing sector
Growth due to service sector.

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

14.

Give reasons for the slow growth and re-emergence of poverty in
Pakistan.

15.

Compare and contrast the development of India, China and Pakistan
with respect to some salient human development indicators.

16.

Comment on the growth rate trends witnessed in China and India
in the last two decades.

17.

Fill in the blanks
(a) First Five Year Plan of ________________ commenced in the
year 1956. (Pakistan/China)
(b) Maternal mortality rate is high in _____________. (China/
Pakistan)
(c) Proportion of people below poverty line is more in __________.
(India/Pakistan)
(d) Reforms in ______________ were introduced in 1978. (China/
Pakistan)

SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES

1.

Organise a class debate on the issue of free trade between India
and China and India and Pakistan.

2.

You are aware that cheap Chinese goods are available in the market,
for example, toys, electronic goods, clothes, batteries etc. Do you
think that these products are comparable in quality and price with
their Indian counterparts? Do they create a threat to our domestic
producers? Discuss.

3.

Do you think India can introduce the one-child norm like China to
reduce population growth? Organise a debate on the policies that
India can follow to reduce population growth.

4.

China’s growth is mainly contributed by the manufacturing sector
and India’s growth by the service sector —prepare a chart showing
the relevance of this statement with respect to the structural
changes in the last decade in the respective countries.

5.

How is China able to lead in all the Human Development Indicators?
Discuss in the classroom. Use Human Development Report of the
latest year.

COMPARATIVE DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS

149

REFERENCES

Books
DREZE, JEAN AND AMAR TYA SEN. 1996. India: Economic Development and Social
Opportunity. Oxford University Press, New Delhi.
Articles
RAY, ALOK. 2002. ‘The Chinese Economic Miracle: Lessons to be Learnt.’
Economic and Political Weekly, September 14, pp. 3835-3848.
ZAIDI, S. AKBAR. 1999. ‘Is Poverty now a Permanent Phenomenon in Pakistan?’
Economic and Political Weekly, October 9, pp. 2943-2951.
Government Reports
Annual Plan 2016-17, Ministry of Planning, Development & Reform, Government of Pakistan accessed from http://pc.gov.pk on 02 January 2017.
Economic Survey, Ministry of Finance, Government of India (for various years).
Human Development Report 2005, United Nations Development Programme,
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Labour Market Indicators, 3rd Edition, International Labour Organisation,
Geneva.
Pakistan: National Human Development Report 2003, United Nations
Development Programme, Second Impression 2004.
World Development Report 2005, The World Bank, Oxford University Press,
New York.
World Development Indicators for various years, World Bank Washington.
Human Development Report for various years, United Nations Development
Programme Geneva.
Key Indicators of Asia and Pacific 2016, Asian Development Bank, Philippines.
Websites
www.stats.gov.cn
www.statpak.gov.pk
www.un.org
www.ilo.org
www.planningcommission.nic.in
www.dgft.delhi.nic.in

150

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

GLOSSARY
The Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) : It is a political,
economic, and cultural organisation of countries located in South-east
Asia— Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, the Philippines, Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar and Vietnam.
Balance of Payments (BOP) : It is a statistical statement summarising all
the external transactions (receipts and payments) on current and capital
account in which a country is involved over a period of time, say, a year. As
the BOP shows the total assets and obligations over a time-period, it always
balances.
Barriers to Entry : This refers to the factors which make it disadvantageous
for new entrants to enter an industry as compared with the firms already
established within the industry.
Better Compliance : Obeying or complying with the Government regulation.
It is referred to usually in case of payment of taxes and dues to the
Government.
Bilateral Trade Agreements : The agreements relating to exchange of
commodities or services between two countries.
Brundtland Commission : A Commission established by United Nations
Organisation in 1983 to study the world’s environmental problems and
propose agenda for addressing them. It came out with a report. The definition
provided by the Commission for the term, ‘sustainable development’, is very
popular and widely cited all over the world.
Budgetary Deficit : A situation when the government’s income and tax
receipts fail to cover its expenditures.
Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) : It is a government organisation that
aims to develop policies and strategies with a thrust on self regulation and
market principles. It promotes energy conservation in different sectors of
the economy and undertakes measures against the wasteful uses of
electricity.
Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) : Outsourcing of business processes
(activities constituting a service) by companies to other companies. This
term is frequently associated with outsourcing of such activities (e.g.
receiving and making calls on behalf of other companies popularly known
as call centres), by foreign companies to Indian companies in the field of
IT -enabled services.
GLOSSARY

151

Carrying Capacity : It is the measure of habitat to indefinitely sustain a
population at a particular density. A more technical definition for carrying
capacity is the largest size of a density-dependent population for which the
population growth rate is zero. Hence, below carrying capacity, populations
will tend to increase, while they will decrease above carrying capacity.
Population size decreases above carrying capacity due to either reduced
survivorship (e.g. due to insufficient space or food) or reproductive success
(e.g. due to insufficient food, or behavioural interactions), or both. The
carrying capacity of an environment will vary for different species in different
habitats, and can change over time due to a variety factors, including trends
in food availability, environmental conditions and space.
Cascading Effect : When tax imposition leads to a disproportionate rise in
prices, i.e. by an extent more than the rise in the tax, it is known as
cascading effect.
Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) : A proportion of the total deposits and reserves
of the commercial banks that is to be kept with the central bank (RBI) in
liquid form. It is used as a measure of control of RBI over the commercial
banks.
Casual Wage Labourer : A person who is casually engaged in others’ farm
or non-farm enterprises and, in return, receives wages according to the
terms of the daily or periodic work contract.
Colonialism : The practice of acquiring colonies by conquest or other means
and making them dependent. It also means extending power, control or
rule by a country over the political and economic life of areas outside its
borders. The main feature of colonialism is exploitation.
Commercialisation of Agriculture : It implies production of crops for the
market rather than for self-consumption i.e. family consumption. During
the British rule, the commercialisation of agriculture acquired a different
meaning — it became basically commercialisation of crops. The British
started offering higher price to farmers for producing cash crops rather
than for food crops. They used these cash crops as raw materials for
industries in Britain.
Communes : Known as people’s communes, or renmin gongshe in China,
were formerly the highest of three administrative levels in rural areas in
the period from 1958 to 1982-85, when they were replaced by townships.
Communes, the largest collective units, were divided in turn into production
brigades and production teams. The communes had governmental, political,
and economic functions.
Consumption Basket : Group of goods and services consumed by a
household. In order to estimate the consumption pattern of people, statistical
agencies identify such items. For instance NSSO has identied 19 groups of
items in the consumption basket. Some of them are (i) cereals (ii) pulses
152

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

(iii) milk and milk products (iv) edible oil (v) vegetables (vi) fuel and light
and (vii) clothing.
Default : Failure to make repayment of the principal and interest on a debt
e.g. sovereign debt (loan obtained by the government) to the lenders, say,
international financial institutions, on the scheduled date, causing loss of
credibility as a debtor.
Deficit Financing : A situation where the expenditure of the government
exceeds its revenue.
Demographic Transition : It is a concept developed by demographer Frank
Notestein in 1945 to describe the typical pattern of falling death and birth
rates in response to better living conditions associated with economic
development. Notestein identified three phases of demographic transition,
pre-industrial, developing and modern industrialised societies. Later
another phase, post-industrial was also included.
Dereservation : Allowing an individual or group of enterprises to produce
goods and services which were hitherto produced by a particular individual
or group of enterprises. In India, it refers to allowing large-scale industries
to produce goods and services which were produced only by the smallscale industries.
Devaluation : A fall in the exchange rate which reduces the value of a
currency in terms of other currencies.
Disinvestment : A deliberate sale of a part of the capital stock of a company
to raise resources and change the equity and/or management structure of
a company.
Employers : Those self-employed workers who by and large, run their
enterprises by hiring labourers.
Enterprise : An undertaking owned and operated by an individual or by
group of individuals to produce and/or distribute goods and/or services
mainly for the purpose of sale, whether fully or partly.
Equities : Shares in the paid up capital or stock of a company whose holders
are considered as owners of the company with voting rights and dividends
in the profit.
Establishment : An enterprise which has got at least one hired worker for
major part of the period of operation in a year.
European Union : It is a union of twenty-five independent states founded
to enhance political, economic and social cooperation within the European
continent. The member countries of European Union are Austria, Belgium,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany,

GLOSSARY

153

Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, Malta, Poland,
Slovakia and Slovenia.
Export Duties : Taxes imposed on goods exported from a country.
Export Promotion : A set of measures (including fiscal and commercial
support measures and steps aimed at removal of trade barriers) taken by a
government to promote the export of goods with a view to achieve higher
economic growth and accumulation of foreign exchange earnings.
Export-Import Policy : The economic policies of the government relating to
its exports and imports.
Family labour/worker : A member who works without receiving wages in
cash or in kind in a farm, an industry, business or trade conducted by the
members of the family.
Financial Institutions : Institutions that engage in mobilisation and
allocation of savings. They include commercial banks, cooperative banks,
developmental banks and investment institutions.
Fiscal Management : The use of taxation and government expenditure to
regulate the economic activities.
Fiscal Policy : All the planned actions of a government in mobilising financial
resources for meeting its expenditure and regulating the economic activities
in a country.
Foreign Direct Investment : Investment of foreign assets into domestic
structures, equipment and organisations. It does not include foreign
investment into the stock markets. Foreign direct investment is thought to
be more useful to a country than investments in the equity of its companies
because equity investments are potentially ‘hot money’ which can leave at
the first sign of trouble, whereas FDI is durable and generally useful whether
things go well or badly.
Foreign Exchange : Currency or bonds of another country.
Foreign Exchange Markets : A market in which currencies are bought
and sold at rates of exchange fixed now, for delivery at specified dates in
the future.
Foreign Institutional Investment : Foreign investments which come in
the form of stocks, bonds, or other financial assets. This form of investment
does not entail active management or control over the firms or investors.
Foreign Institutional Investors (FIIs) : Banking and non-banking financial
institutions of foreign origin e.g. commercial banks, investment banks,
mutual funds, pension funds or other such institutional investors (as
distinct from the domestic financial institutions investing) whose investment

154

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

in stocks and bonds in the country through stock markets have significant
influence.
Formal Sector Establishments : All the public sector establishments and
those private sector establishments which employ 10 or more hired workers.
G-20 : A forum of countries that intents to promote global economic stability
and sustainable growth. This forum brings together finance ministers and
central bank governors from 19 countries: Argentina, Australia, Brazil,
Canada, China, France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, The
Republic of Korea, Mexico, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Turkey, The
United Kingdom, The United States of America. The European Union is
also a member of G-20 and is represented by the President of the European
Council and by Head of the European Central Bank.
G-8 : The Group of Eight (G-8) consists of Canada, France, Germany, Italy,
Japan, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United
States of America, and Russian Federation. The hallmark of the G-8 is an
annual economic and political summit meeting of the heads of government
with international officials, though there are numerous subsidiary meetings
and policy research.The Presidency of the group rotates every year. For the
year 2006 it was held by Russia.
Goods and Services Tax : It is a single indirect tax on the supply of goods
and services. It was introduced in July 2017 by abolishing a variety of taxes,
such as sales tax and excise that prevailed in India. Under GST, tax is
imposed on the basis of value addition at each stage of the movement of
goods and services. Different slabs of tax rates, such as 0 per cent, 5 per
cent, 12 per cent, 18 per cent and 28 per cent, are imposed on almost all
goods and services. This slab is same throughout the country.
Gratuity : An amount of money given by the employer to the employee at
the time of retirement for services rendered by the employee.
Gross Domestic Product : The total value of final goods and services
produced within a country’s borders in a year, regardless of ownership. It
is used as one of many indicators of the standard of living in a country, but
there are limitations with this view.
Gross Value Added: The sum of a country’s GDP and net of subsidies and
taxes in the economy (GVA=GDP+Subsidies–indirect taxes).
Household : A group of persons normally living together and taking
food from a common kitchen. The word ‘normally’ means that temporary
visitors are excluded and those who temporarly staying away are
included.
Import Licensing : Permission required from the government to import
goods into a country.
Import Substitution : A policy of the state for development of economy in
which import of goods is generally substituted by domestic production
(through import controls, tariffs and other restrictions) with a view to
encourage domestic industry on grounds of self-sufficiency and domestic
employment.
GLOSSARY

155

Infant Mortality Rate : It is the number of deaths of infants before reaching
the age of one, in a particular year, per 1,000 live births during that year.
Inflation : A sustained rise in the general price level.
Informal Sector Enterprises : Those private sector enterprises, which
employ less than 10 workers on a regular basis.
Integration of Domestic Economy : A situation where the policies of
government facilitate free trade and investment with other countries making
the domestic economy work together with other economies in an efficient
and mutually interdependent way.
Invisibles : Various items enter in the current account of the balance of
payments, some of which are not visible goods. Invisibles are mainly services,
like tourism, transport by shipping or by airways, and financial services
such as insurance and banking. They also include gifts sent abroad or
received from abroad and private transfer of funds, government grants and
interests, profits and dividends.
Labour Laws : All the rules and regulations framed by the government to
protect the interests of the workers.
Land/Revenue Settlement : With the British acquiring territorial rights
in different parts of India, administration of territories was formulated on
the basis of survey of land. It was decided in the interests of government
in terms of revenues to be collected from each parcel of land in possession
of either a ryot (means peasant) or a mahal (revenue village) or a zamindar
(a proprietary land holder). Decision in each of these cases was meant for
the rights of the latter over land for the purposes of either ownership of
land or rights to cultivation. This system is known as land/revenue
settlement. There were different land settlements formulated in India. They
are (i) system of permanent settlement, which is also known as the
zamindari system (ii) ryotwari system (a system of revenue settlement
entered into by the government with individual tenants) (iii) mahalwari
system (a system of revenue settlement entered into by the government
with a mahal).
Life Expectancy at Birth (years) : The number of years a newborn infant
would live if prevailing patterns of age-specific mortality rates at the time of
birth were to stay the same throughout the child’s life.
Maternal Mortality Rate : It is the relationship between the number of
maternal deaths due to childbearing by the number of live births or by the
sum of live births and foetal deaths in a given year.
Merchant Bankers : Banks or financial institutions, also known as
investment bankers, that specialise in advising the companies and
managing their equity and debt requirement (often referred to as portfolio
management) through floatation and sale/purchase of stocks and bonds.
Morbidity : It is the propensity to fall ill. It affects a person’s work by making
him or her temporarily disabled. Prolonged morbidity may lead to mortality.
156

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

In our country, acute respiratory infections and diarrhoea are two major
causes of morbidity.
Mortality rate : The word ‘mortality’ comes from ‘mortal’ which originates
from the Latin word mors (meaning death). It is the annual number of deaths
(from a disease or in general) per 1,000 people. It is distinct from morbidity
rate, which refers to the number of people who have a disease compared to
the total number of people in a population.
MRTP Act : An Act (Monopolies Restrictive Trade Practices Act) framed to
prevent monopolistic practices and regulate the conduct or business
practices of firms that are not in public interest.
Multilateral Trade Agreements : Trade agreements made by a country
with more than two nations to exchange goods and services.
National Product/Income : Total value of goods and services produced in
a country plus income from abroad.
Nationalisation : Transfer of ownership from private sector to public sector.
This involves take over of companies owned by individuals or group of
individuals by either state or central government. In some contexts, it also
involves transfer of ownership from state government to central government.
New Economic Policy : A term used to describe the policies adopted in
India since 1991.
Non-renewable Resources : Resources that cannot be renewed. They have
a finite, even if large, stock. Some examples are fossils fuels such as oil and
coal and mineral resources—iron, lead, aluminum, uranium.
Non-tariff Barriers : All the restrictions on imports by a government in the
form other than taxes. They mainly include restrictions on quantity and
quality of goods imported.
Opportunity Cost : It is defined with respect to a particular value or action
and is equal to the value of the foregone alternative choice or action.
Pension : A monthly payment to a worker who has retired from work.
Per Capita Income : Total national income of a country divided by its
population in a specific period.
Permit License Raj : A term used to denote the rules and regulations
framed by the government to start, run and operate an enterprise for
production of goods and services in India.
Planning Commission : An organisation set up by the Government of India.
It is responsible for making assessment of all resources of the country,
augmenting deficient resources, formulating plans for the most effective
and balanced utilisation of resources and determining priorities.
Poverty Line : The per capita expenditure on certain minimum needs of a
person including food intake of a daily average of 2,400 calories in rural
areas and 2,100 calories in urban areas.
Private Sector Establishments : All those establishments, which are
owned and operated by individuals or group of individuals.
GLOSSARY

157

Productivity : Output per unit of input employed. Increase in the efficiency
on the part of capital or labour leads to increase in productivity. This term
is generally used to refer to productivity increase in labour inputs.
Provident Fund : A savings fund in which both employer and employee
contribute regularly in the interest of the employee. It is maintained by the
government and given to the employee when he or she resigns or retires
from work.
Public Sector Establishments : All those establishments which are owned
and operated by the government. They may be run either by local
government, state government or by central government independently or
jointly.
Quantitative Restrictions : Restrictions in the form of total quantities or
quotas imposed on imports to reduce balance of payments (BOP) deficit
and protect domestic industry.
Regular Salaried/Wage Employee : Persons who work in others’ farm or
non-farm enterprises and, in return, receive salary or wages on a regular
basis (i.e. not on the basis of daily or periodic renewal of work contract).
They include not only persons getting time wage but also persons receiving
piece wage or salary and paid apprentices, both full time and part-time.
Renewable Resources : Resources that can be renewed through natural
processes if they are used wisely. Forests, animals and fishes, if not overexploited, get easily renewed. Water is also in that category.
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) : It is an
association of eight countries of South Asia — Bangladesh, Bhutan, India,
Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka and Afghanistan. SAARC provides a
platform for the peoples of South Asia to work together in a spirit of
friendship, trust and understanding. It aims to accelerate the process of
economic and social development in member countries.
Self-employed : Those who operate their own farm or non-farm enterprises
or are engaged independently in a profession or trade with one or a few
partners. They have freedom to decide how, where and when to produce
and sell or carry out their operation. Their earning is determined wholly or
mainly by sales or profits from their enterprises.
Social Security : A government or privately established system of measures,
which ensures material security for the elderly, disabled, destitute, widows
and children. It includes pension, gratuity, provident fund, maternal
benefits, health care etc.
Special Economic Zone (SEZ) : It is a geographical region that has economic
laws different from a country’s typical economic laws. Usually the goal is to
increase foreign investment. Special Economic Zones have been established
in several countries, including the People’s Republic of China, India, Jordan,
Poland, Kazakhstan, the Philippines and Russia.
158

INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Stabilisation Measures : Fiscal and monetary measures adopted to control
fluctuations in the balance of payments and high rate of inflation.
State Electricity Boards (SEBs) : These are part of the state administration
that generate, transmit and distribute electricity in different states.
Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) : A minimum proportion of the total deposits
and reserves to be maintained by the banks in liquid form as per the
regulations of the central bank (RBI). Maintenance of SLR, in addition to
the Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR), is an obligation of the banks.
Stock Exchange : A market in which the securities of governments and
public companies are traded. It provides the facilities for stock brokers to
trade company stocks and other securities.
Stock Market : An institution where stocks and shares are traded.
Structural Reform Policies : Long-term measures like liberalisation,
deregulation and privatisation aimed to improve the efficiency and
competitiveness of the economy.
Tariff : A tax on imports, which can be levied either on physical units, e.g.
per tonne (specific) or on value. Tariffs may be imposed for a variety of
reasons including: to raise government revenue, to protect domestic industry
from subsidised or low-wage imports, to boost domestic employment, or to
ease a deficit on the balance of payments. Apart from the revenue that they
raise tariffs achieve little good—they reduce the volume of trade and increase
the price of the imported commodity to consumers.
Tariff Barriers : All the restrictions on imports by a government in the
form of taxes.
Trade Union : An organisation of workers formed for the purpose of
addressing its members’ interests in respect of wages, benefits, and working
conditions.
Unemployment : A situation in which all those who, owing to lack of work,
are not working but either seek work through employment exchanges,
intermediaries, friends or relatives or by making applications to prospective
employers or express their willingness or availability for work under the
prevailing condition of work and remunerations.
Urbanisation : Expansion of a metropolitan area, namely the proportion of
total population or area in urban localities or areas (cities and towns), or
the increase of this proportion over time. It can thus represent a level of
urban population relative to total population of the area, or the rate at
which the urban proportion is increasing. Both can be expressed in
percentage terms, the rate of change expressed as a percentage per year,
decade or period between censuses.
Worker-Population Ratio : Total number of workers divided by the
population. It is expressed in percentage.
GLOSSARY

159

NOTESo

